## Say Nothing by Patrick Keefe

Source: [Say Nothing by Patrick Keefe](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/say-nothing-en)
![Say Nothing](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5ca9b8106cee07000759a4b5/1_1/470.jpg)

Say Nothing (2018) explores a shocking true story of murder during the Northern
Ireland Conflict. These blinks are a compelling meditation on one of the
darkest chapters of Irish history, and shine a light on some of the key figures
in the conflict as well as the period’s most notorious atrocities.

## Final summary

Jean McConville was murdered by the IRA under suspicion of being an informer
for the British army. Dolours Price, an infamous IRA volunteer, carried out the
killing. Gerry Adams, the former leader of Sinn Féin, gave the order for Jean’s
execution. Furthermore, few in Northern Ireland were satisfied when the
conflict ended and the Good Friday Agreement was signed. Not only did Jean,
along with thousands of others, lose their lives, but Ireland remains divided
to this day.

## What’s in it for me? Get a glimpse into Northern Ireland’s troubled past.

On December 7, 1972, the children of a Belfast woman named Jean McConville
opened the family’s front door to find a crowd of men and women waiting
outside. The children recognized some of them as their neighbors. Leaving her
ten children at home alone, Jean got into a van with the visitors. This would
be the last time her family ever saw her alive. Her children would spend the
next three decades trying to find out what happened to their mother.

Now, for the first time, Patrick Keefe reveals the true story behind Jean’s
disappearance. In these blinks, you’ll take a tour through the tragic and
brutally violent years of the Northern Ireland Conflict, and uncover the role
that the IRA played in Jean McConville’s death. You’ll also learn some of the
conflict’s key events, from the chaos of Bloody Friday and the Old Bailey
Bombings to the hunger strike of a pair of Irish paramilitaries in captivity.
Lastly, you’ll learn how an ordinary Belfast woman became embroiled in a bloody
conflict that claimed the lives of 3,500 people over 30 years.

Read on to discover:
- why Jean McConville disappeared;
- what the British Government did in response to the Price sisters’ hunger
  strike; and; and
- how an American university’s history project revealed the secrets of the
  conflict.

## In the midst of the Northern Ireland Conflict, Jean McConville disappeared without a trace.

At 38 years old, Jean McConville had already given birth to 14 children, four
of whom had since died. Her husband, Arthur, had died of lung cancer the year
before, and now she was raising her ten children alone and with little money.
The family lived in an ugly housing estate, in a damp flat where black mold
crawled up the walls. Needless to say, life wasn’t easy for Jean.

But on that cold December night, things were about to get much worse.

When Jean heard the doorbell ring she was in the bath after a long day.
Assuming it was her daughter Helen returning from the local fish and chip shop
with supper, her other children opened the door.

But it wasn’t Helen.

Instead, a group of men and women entered the McConville home. Some wore
balaclavas, but others didn’t, and the children recognized them as their
neighbors. The group told Jean that she needed to get dressed and accompany
them downstairs, to a van waiting outside.

As she left her children behind, Jean told them not to worry – she would be
back soon.

She was never seen again, and her children would spend the next three decades
wondering what had happened to their mother.

But how could a seemingly ordinary Northern Irish woman disappear without a
trace?

The answer, it turned out, lay in the dreadful conflict that had engulfed
Belfast and the whole of Northern Ireland three years earlier. Jean McConville
was a victim of the** Troubles**.

This is what people often call the Northern Ireland Conflict, which began in
the late 1960s. At that time, the region’s Catholic inhabitants had long been
the victims of discrimination and institutional racism at the hands of their
Protestant neighbors. Even though Catholics made up around 50 percent of the
region’s population, they were routinely excluded from good jobs, decent
housing, the police force and political power.

Indeed, the situation was so dire for Northern Ireland’s Catholics, that
thousands had already chosen to emigrate in search of a better life, leaving
for places such as America, Australia and the Republic of Ireland itself.

But not everyone was ready to give up and get out. In the late 1960s, many
young Catholics in Northern Ireland were looking to improve their situation,
and violence seemed like the only answer.

It was this violence that would eventually take Jean McConville’s life.

## Dolours and Marian Price, as well as Gerry Adams, were key figures in the IRA.

In 1969, disillusioned Catholics in Northern Ireland had one thing on their
minds: getting the British out of Ireland. Three of these people, Gerry Adams
and the sisters Dolours and Marian Price, would soon become key players in the
Troubles.

Since the partition of Ireland in 1921, the small island had been split in two:
the Republic of Ireland, where Catholics held power and formed the overwhelming
majority of the population, and Northern Ireland, which was still part of the
United Kingdom and under the control of the British Government.

To achieve their aim of self-determination, a paramilitary group known as the
Provisional Irish Republican Army, more commonly known simply as the IRA, was
formed in Northern Ireland in 1969. Their goal? To compel the British
Government to rid itself of its colonial possession by taking up arms against
the Protestants running Northern Ireland, who were determined to remain part of
the United Kingdom. The IRA hoped to unite Ireland once more.

There was already a proud tradition of violent republicanism in Northern
Ireland.

Dolours and Marian Price, who later became part of a notorious IRA bombing
campaign, came from a family of staunch republicans. The sisters grew up
surrounded by examples of self-sacrifice for the republican cause. Their aunt,
Bridie Dolan, had herself been active in the fight against the British. She had
been blinded, and lost both hands after some explosives she was mixing to make
bombs suddenly ignited. In 1971, aged just 21 and 18 respectively, Dolours and
Marian joined the family tradition and were inducted into the IRA.

At around the same time as the Price sisters, a young man named Gerry Adams
joined the IRA.

Although Adams’ formal education only went as far as high school, he quickly
came to represent the strategic and intellectual arm of the IRA. Eloquent and
highly intelligent, Adams was able to grasp the wider political context of
their armed struggle and strategize accordingly. He would become one of the
most important decision-makers in the IRA and arguably the group’s leader,
though he has always denied this. Though Adams gave violent orders, he was
known for never getting his own hands dirty.

As the IRA looked for ways to provoke the British Government into withdrawing
from Ireland, they hit upon a method of destruction that would become their
calling card: the car bomb.

## Car bombs were a perfect vehicle for the IRA’s brand of terror in both Ireland and England.

During the three decades of the Troubles, any unfamiliar car parked on a
Belfast street could cause public panic – and with good reason. In both
Northern Ireland and England, IRA car bombs caused bloodshed and mayhem on an
unprecedented scale.

Car bombs had two main advantages for the IRA. Firstly, they were driven to
their destination rather than carried, so they could be much heavier and packed
with more explosives. Secondly, a car was perfect camouflage for a bomb. A
smaller device left on the street might quickly get noticed, but a car could be
safely parked for many hours without attracting police attention.

On July 21, 1972, a day that would come to be known as Bloody Friday, car bombs
were used to devastating effect.

Starting just after 2 p.m., around 20 bombs that the IRA had planted around
Belfast, most of them car bombs, began to explode. The targets of the
explosions included busy shopping centers, train depots and bus stations.
Importantly, the IRA has always maintained that they intended to destroy
commercial buildings and government infrastructure on Bloody Friday – not kill
anyone. Indeed, the group had telephoned the authorities that afternoon and
warned them to evacuate these areas. But the authorities were overwhelmed by
the number of bombs, and weren’t able to act on every warning. The result? Nine
people were killed, including a young teenage boy, and 130 were injured.

After Bloody Friday, many in the IRA felt regret and a growing sense of
unfairness. The people of Northern Ireland, after all, seemed to be the only
ones dying in the conflict, while the British had yet to suffer on their own
soil.

With the support of the IRA leadership, including Gerry Adams, Dolours Price
planned to correct this imbalance.

On March 8, 1973, Dolours, her sister Marian and several others drove car bombs
to London and parked them outside four important British institutions: the Old
Bailey courts, military offices near Whitehall, the Ministry of Agriculture and
New Scotland Yard. Although the bombs at New Scotland Yard and Whitehall were
located by the police ahead of time, the two remaining bombs went off as
planned, and 250 people were injured in the blasts.

That same day, Marian and Dolours Price were apprehended by the police at
Heathrow Airport. Their capture would result in a high-stakes battle of wills
between the Price sisters and the British Government.

## The Price sisters went on hunger strike to win a return to Ireland.

After Marian and Dolours Price were arrested for the bombing campaign in
London, they were swiftly charged, tried and sentenced to 20 years in jail. As
they had committed their crimes in England, the British Government decided to
incarcerate the sisters there rather than in Northern Ireland.

But the Price sisters had other ideas, and demanded that they be transferred
back to a Northern Irish prison. When their request went unheeded, they turned
their own bodies into a battleground by going on hunger strike.

Within weeks, both Marian and Dolours had lost a worrying amount of weight.

Surprisingly, the rapid deterioration of their health was a cause of great
concern for the British Government. As the Troubles raged in Northern Ireland,
the last thing the British wanted was to make martyrs out of two young Irish
women. If the Prices died, there would likely be violent reprisals from the
IRA. Moreover, the image of two emaciated young women, dead at the hands of the
English, would be sure to win the Irish republican movement more hearts, minds
and fresh recruits.

But instead of acceding to the Prices’ demands, the British Government decided
on a more controversial strategy: force-feeding.

In practice, this meant that a group of doctors, nurses and guards would hold
each sister down, insert a tube into their stomachs, and pour food into them.
The sisters found the process degrading, painful and frightening. To put the
tube in, a wooden bit was inserted into their mouths. After weeks of biting
down and fighting against the bit, the sisters’ teeth were loose and decaying.
Often, after being fed, Marian and Dolours would immediately vomit the food
back up again.

The Price sisters weren’t the only ones horrified by the force-feeding. This
practice had also been used against female suffragettes in English prisons many
decades before. British feminists were outraged that this was happening to
women again, even likening force-feeding to rape.

In the end, the Price sisters prevailed.

After months of force-feeding, they began to resist so violently that doctors
recommended stopping it altogether to avoid the sisters seriously harming
themselves. As they started to lose a pound of weight a day and proclaimed
their willingness to die for Ireland, the British Government changed tack. In
1975, it sent the sisters back to Northern Ireland to finish out their
sentences.

## Jean McConville was murdered by the IRA, and left in an unmarked grave.

During the Troubles, with bombs exploding and the British Government at
loggerheads with the IRA, the children of Jean McConville continued to search
for answers. What really happened to their mother on that cold night in
December 1972?

In recent years, the dreadful answer has become clear.

After the Troubles finally came to an end in the late 1990s, several prominent
members of the IRA were interviewed as part of a project for the American
university, Boston College. One was Dolours Price. Another was a man named
Brendan Hughes, who had become one of Gerry Adams’ right-hand men during the
Troubles. Both told similar stories about what had happened to Jean.

Apparently, Jean Mcconville had become known to the IRA as an informer for the
British army. In the weeks before she disappeared, the IRA had searched Jean’s
house and found a military radio in her kitchen. Jean confessed that she had
been using it to pass information to the British. According to Hughes, she was
merely given a warning and a beating on that occasion. However, just one week
later she was found to have another military radio.

Unfortunately for Jean, the IRA now considered her a repeat offender. The
group’s leadership held talks about what to do with her, and swiftly agreed
that she would be executed.

But they also had to decide what to do with her body. Ivor Bell, another senior
IRA member, suggested that Jean’s body be dumped on a Belfast street as a
warning to other would-be informants. Gerry Adams, though, insisted that this
could backfire. Jean was after all a widow, and a mother of ten children, most
of whom were still dependent on her. If it became common knowledge that the IRA
had killed her the group risked losing public support and having the Catholic
community turn against them.

Adams instead suggested that Jean should permanently disappear, making it
impossible for anyone to prove that the IRA had killed her.

And that’s exactly what happened. In her taped testimony, Dolours Price
admitted to being one of the people who drove Jean McConville to the place of
her execution, took her to the lip of a freshly dug grave, and shot her in the
back of the head.

Jean’s body was eventually found in 2003. After 31 years, her children were
finally able to put their mother to rest.

## After the Good Friday Agreement, Gerry Adams became a polarizing figure.

But what happened to Gerry Adams, the senior IRA man who several sources said
had ordered Jean’s murder? Was he ever held accountable for her death? The
answer, quite simply, is no. Instead, Adams was hailed around the world as a
force for peace and compromise.

Adams, who was then the leader of the political wing of the IRA, signed the
Good Friday Agreement on April 10, 1998. The agreement paved the way for a
permanent cessation of violence by the IRA. In return for this ceasefire,
British Prime Minister Tony Blair agreed that Northern Ireland would be granted
a fully devolved parliament and a much softer border with the Republic of
Ireland. He also promised that if a majority in Northern Ireland expressed a
clear wish to join with the Republic of Ireland, Great Britain would not stand
in their way.

After the agreement was signed, Adams was feted by many as a visionary
peacemaker. But to both the family of Jean McConville and IRA fighters such as
Dolours and Marian Price, Gerry Adams represented something very different.

To Jean’s children, Adams was the man who had gotten away with her murder, and
the family campaigned at length for him to be brought to justice. In April
2014, Adams was finally arrested in relation to her killing but was released
without charge four days later. He has never been prosecuted for her death.

After the Good Friday Agreement, Adams was also reviled by many IRA
paramilitaries, such as Brendan Hughes and the Price Sisters.

Why? Because he had agreed to a ceasefire when the IRA had not yet achieved its
goal: a united Ireland. To this day, Northern Ireland remains part of the
United Kingdom.

What was the point, Dolours Price asked herself, of all the violent deeds she
had committed, like the murder of Jean McConville and the planting of bombs, if
the IRA had not even achieved its aims? In IRA circles, people were so
disillusioned with Gerry Adams that they joked that the abbreviation for “Good
Friday Agreement,” GFA, stood for “Got Fuck All.”

Gerry Adams claims to this day that he was never even in the IRA. It may be
fair to say that, although Adams was instrumental in bringing peace to Northern
Ireland, his involvement in the peace process came at a cost to justice. And
for the families of IRA victims like Jean McConville, that cost was too high.

## What to read next: Ghettoside, by Jill Leovy.

Jean McConville’s murder is a shocking illustration of how societal and
political conditions can cost ordinary people their lives. For more on this
topic, we highly recommend **Ghettoside** by Jill Leovy. Taking an unflinching
look at the failure of the police to protect African-American neighborhoods,
**Ghettoside** examines the high rates of homicide in black communities, the
historical background to these dreadful statistics and the institutional racism
that makes them possible.

So for another deep dive into the connection between history, society and
violence, we highly recommend the blinks to **Ghettoside**.