# What You Don't Know about Leadership, But Probably Should by Jeffrey A. Kottler

Source: [What You Don't Know about Leadership, But Probably Should by Jeffrey A.  Kottler](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/what-you-dont-know-about-leadership-but-probably-should-en/)

>What You Don’t Know about Leadership, But Probably Should (2018) takes the
>latest research and psychological theories from the field of leadership
>science and explains how individuals can apply them to their daily work life.
>Using examples from famous leaders of all kinds, the author gives tips on how
>any leader can more effectively manage a team during times of conflict and
>stress.

## Final summary

The key message in this book: **Great leaders take charge of their own life,
habits and behavior. The keys to effective and successful leadership include
being honest about your limitations, exhibiting self-confidence and creating
strong bonds of trust.  With these attributes in mind, today’s leaders can take
their team to new levels of success.**

Actionable advice: **Process failure constructively.**

Research has shown that the key to successful leadership is not to avoid making
mistakes, but to instead learn from mistakes and understand what it is that
should be avoided in the future. In order to turn your mistakes into valuable
lessons, ask yourself whether there were warning signs prior to the mistakes
you’ve made. You can also turn to trusted colleagues and ask them the same
question to see if they noticed any warning signs. Then, compare your
perceptions with those of your colleagues to make sure you don’t end up
repeating the same mistakes.

## What’s in it for me? Learn the traits that have distinguished the great leaders throughout time.

Do you dislike your job? Do you dread your morning alarm, that shrill herald of
the day’s drudgery? If so, you’re not alone. In fact, you’re in the majority:
an astonishing 80 percent of American workers report being disengaged or
dissatisfied with their job. What’s the reason behind this depressing
statistic?

One of the biggest factors is bad leaders. No one wants to face day after day
of being led by someone who neither listens, extends trust nor thinks there’s
more than one way to do things.

There has to be a better way to lead, right?

Well, there is. Leaders can not only help employees manage the nine-to-five;
they can inspire them to solve problems and reach new levels of success and
work satisfaction.

In these blinks, you’ll discover
- the three most important characteristics of a great leader;
- why phones kill effective meetings; and
- what Horatio Nelson and Sir Francis Drake can teach us about leadership.

## Good leaders understand their own ignorance and respect their subordinates’ expertise.

If you’ve been working long enough, it’s only a matter of time before you end
up with a bad boss. But have you ever asked yourself what it is that makes some
people so bad at leading effectively?

One trait common to bad bosses is that they believe they know everything. Great
leaders, in contrast, know that, especially in today’s chaotic, fast-changing
environment, it’s impossible to know it all.

Michael Skelly is an experienced leader, responsible for launching several
successful companies focused on renewable energy. While earning his MBA at an
Ivy League school, Skelly realized that, though his classmates were bright,
they were often too scared to ask questions, since asking would reveal a lack
of knowledge.

At the same time, Skelly found that these classmates all respected his
willingness to speak up and admit his ignorance. Skelly now incorporates this
refreshing honesty into all his business dealings, and when asked about his
greatest strength as a leader, he points to his ability to ask questions and
admit when he doesn’t understand something.

Skelly’s example also shows that being a humble leader is important, especially
today, when more organizations are moving toward democratic and decentralized
leadership structures.

Universities and hospitals, as well as pharmaceutical and technology companies,
are all favoring *participatory leadership*, which brings employees from every
level into the decision-making process. Rather than adhering to the traditional
model of having everyone obey orders passed down from on high, these
organizations are implementing more democratic and collaborative structures.

Appropriately enough, the author has found that it’s within these
democratically-run organizations that know-it-all leaders are most resented.

Doctors, professors, software engineers and scientists lodge the most
complaints about bosses who stick their noses in their work. So a good leader
isn’t one who barks orders or thinks they have all the right answers. A good
boss knows when to stand back and trust that their staff has what it takes to
make decisions and do the job they’ve been hired to do.

## Good leaders understand the power of meaningful communication, so ban mobile phones from the meeting room.

Have you ever been in a meeting and suddenly realized that most people aren’t
really listening? Sure, no one is whispering to his neighbor or passing notes,
but each pair of eyes is directed toward a laptop, a tablet or phones.

All good leaders know that good teamwork requires clear communication between
team members. And many recent studies have shown that mobile phones can prevent
your team from achieving the quality communication it needs to succeed.

One such study found that the mere presence of a phone – whether it’s resting
on the table or in a person’s hand – can adversely affect the way people
interact during a meeting, even if the phone is switched off! According to the
researchers, the presence of a phone made people more likely to keep
discussions light and focused on non-controversial or insignificant topics. Not
only that, but a visible phone also reduced feelings of empathy between the
participants.

So, if you want to hold meaningful meetings and honest discussions, you should
take control and make your conference room a phone-free zone.

You can either be up-front about your policy, requesting that all team members
come to the meeting “naked” – that is, without any devices. Or, if that doesn’t
work, you can bring out a basket at the start of each meeting and collect
everyone’s phone. If you go this route, it’s good to remind people ahead of
time to bring pen and paper, in case anyone uses their device to take notes.

It’s also advised that leaders keep their phones out of sight when they’re in a
negotiation situation. Researchers have found that, when leaders paid attention
to their devices during important negotiations, they were seen as less
trustworthy by their counterparts in the discussion.

*“The average adult now checks his or her phone on average every six minutes."*

## Great leaders share three attributes, but poor leaders tend to have one thing in common.

It may go without saying these days, but when looking back at US presidents, we
see a remarkable range of different personalities.

For instance, Lyndon B. Johnson was an outgoing and playful type; he and his
secret-service agents would sometimes play hide-and-seek. Whereas Calvin
Coolidge was so introverted that guests to the White House used to make wagers
about who could prompt him to say something during dinner.

With personalities so vastly different, you may wonder if the leaders of the
free world – the people who epitomize leadership – share any common attributes.

But when we take a closer look, we can pinpoint three leadership attributes
that we can learn from. In fact, these attributes were even valued during Plato
and Aristotle’s time. And today, they continue to be considered qualities that
separate great leaders from mediocre ones.

The first is *self-confidence*. Great leaders are calm under pressure, clear
about their personal and professional beliefs and secure in their ability to
get results.

Second is a *proactive spirit*. This typically appears in leaders as optimism,
enthusiasm and helpfulness. Likewise, great leaders are diligent and reliable,
and when they say they’ll get something done, you can trust that they’ll follow
through. In other words, they back up their words and intentions with action.

The third attribute is* relational capacity*. This one manifests itself in
leaders as agreeableness, empathy and sensitivity to the needs of staff. As a
result, the best leaders inspire a sense of loyalty and commitment in their
followers, who aren’t merely dedicated to the cause, or the company, but to the
leader as a person.

Now, just because a leader has one or two of these attributes doesn’t make him
a good leader. Indeed, the *worst* bosses tend to have too much
self-confidence, otherwise known as *hubris*. This is often the result of their
experiencing success in some other context, which then goes to their head,
causing them to feel overconfident in their abilities. This hubris can have
disastrous results.

In fact, hubris is what doomed the Russian invasions of both Napoleon and
Hitler. Filled with an overinflated sense of pride, they ignored their advisors
and doomed their armies to failure.

## Terrible leadership at work has terrible implications at home.

Does this sound familiar? Your boss chews you out in front of your peers,
causing you to feel publicly humiliated, even though you were just following
orders! You then return home, fuming with anger. And as you walk through the
door, you see the kitchen’s a mess – and this pushes you over the edge: you get
upset with your partner or children, causing confusion and injury all around.

There is plenty of research that shows how bad treatment from a leader makes
employees more likely to take out their frustrations on other people,
particularly those at home. The employee might even take it out on a pet, which
is why this chain of events is known as *kick the dog* behavior.

The problem isn’t only that a hurt employee may vent anger on innocent people
or pets, but also that bad, dysfunctional leadership may cause employees to
adopt this style of behavior in their own life. So a mom who is verbally abused
by her boss at work will use these same hurtful tactics in her parenting, and
her kids will grow up and perhaps bequeath this bad behavior to *their*
offspring.

The home can also become a dumping ground for hostile emotions when an
employee’s workplace is too oppressive, with no room for frustrations to be
aired. And, sadly enough, research shows that venting pent-up anger on loved
ones does indeed make us feel better.

Or, as neurology professor Robert Sapolsky put it, “Giving ulcers can help you
avoid getting them.”

To put the point in more scientific terms, studies have found that aggressive
behavior directed at others, after you’ve experienced similar aggression from
someone else, can effectively lower your stress hormones.

So it’s not uncommon for people to soothe their damaged self-esteem by lashing
out at others, and it’s our leaders’ responsibility to make sure the fuse never
gets lit.

## The best leaders promote trust and make sure staff feel cared for and valued.

If you have any familiarity with Britain’s most distinguished military leaders
of yore, then you’ve probably heard of Admiral Horatio Nelson, the naval hero
who died at the Battle of Trafalgar. Nelson is particularly famous for breaking
all the traditional rules of warfare and still inspiring utter loyalty from his
crew.

It’s not easy to be an unconventional leader and still command the loyalty and
trust of your staff. So how did Nelson do it? Quite simply, Admiral Nelson
inspired his crew by forging powerful bonds and demonstrating that there was
nothing he wouldn’t do to keep his men safe and victorious.

This brings us to the next essential piece of great leadership: the *creation
of trusting, reciprocal relationships*.

Compared to other leadership techniques and strategies, these types of
relationships are paramount. Studies have found that all other techniques
combined generally account for less than 15 percent of a team’s successful
results. The majority of positive leadership results derive from trust, caring
and other mutually supportive bonds that come from a strong relationship
between leaders and followers.

So, if you aspire to Admiral Nelson-like levels of leadership, don’t focus on
clever ways to intervene in the work of your staff. Focus on building a healthy
working environment that relies on trust and fosters caring attitudes.

A great way to do this is to reduce inequality between different wage groups.

These days, the average CEO is paid *three hundred times *more than the lowest
paid staffer. And researchers have suggested that this extreme inequality is a
major contributor to the distance that employees and executives will experience
in their relationships with one another. And this distance, in turn, has been
shown to be responsible for much of the bullying and aggressive behavior within
a company.

In some organizations, the massive pay gap will be beyond your control. But in
these situations you can try to compensate by finding ways to make sure your
staff feels valued.

## Effective, stress-free leaders stay calm and confident under pressure and don’t worry about what they can’t control.

Over a relatively short period of time, we’ve experienced profound changes in
our everyday technology. Today’s smartphones are just as powerful as room-sized
computers were a few decades ago.

And these technological breakthroughs have come with tremendous advantages, but
they’ve also brought significant stress to leaders who are now expected to
react to situations with a speed that previous generations would have found
absurd.

Nevertheless, it’s crucial that effective leaders stay cool under pressure,
even if they might be panicking on the inside.

Another legendary British leader was the sea captain Sir Francis Drake. In the
1500s, when word arrived that the mighty ships of the Spanish Armada had been
spotted on the horizon, Sir Drake didn’t overreact. At the time, he was playing
a round of lawn bowling and with utter confidence he said, “time enough to play
the game and thrash the Spaniards afterwards.”

Drake wasn’t being glib. Rather, he knew that, were he to panic, his men would
panic, too, and the battle might be lost before it even began. Though he might
have been filled with dread, he projected confidence and made it seem that
everything was under control. Like Sir Drake, a good leader will always stay
composed, even in the direst of circumstances.

Fortunately, there are ways for leaders to lessen the amount of stress they’re
experiencing.

One of the best things a leader can do is remember that many factors are out of
their control, and that it’s futile to spend time and energy wrestling with
things that can’t be controlled. So keep in mind that how others react, how the
economy is performing and whatever happened in the past are all beyond your
influence.

Whenever you find yourself obsessing over something, take a mental step back
and be honest about whether you can truly do anything about the situation.

It can be difficult not to worry about certain things, even if you know those
worries are of little help. So try to keep a healthy perspective and remember
that life is short, and it would be a shame to spend too much of it fretting
about things that you simply can’t alter.

## Final summary

The key message in this book: **Great leaders take charge of their own life,
habits and behavior. The keys to effective and successful leadership include
being honest about your limitations, exhibiting self-confidence and creating
strong bonds of trust.  With these attributes in mind, today’s leaders can take
their team to new levels of success.**

Actionable advice: **Process failure constructively.** Research has shown that
the key to successful leadership is not to avoid making mistakes, but to
instead learn from mistakes and understand what it is that should be avoided in
the future.  In order to turn your mistakes into valuable lessons, ask yourself
whether there were warning signs prior to the mistakes you’ve made. You can
also turn to trusted colleagues and ask them the same question to see if they
noticed any warning signs. Then, compare your perceptions with those of your
colleagues to make sure you don’t end up repeating the same mistakes.

## Suggested further reading: Leadership is Half the Story by Marc Hurwitz and Samantha Hurwitz

*Leadership is Half the Story* (2015) presents leadership as a fluid state that
people can and should move in and out of as circumstances change. By adopting
such an approach, you can increase collaboration and boost success.
