# The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck

## Final summary

We try to do too much in life and this leads to stress and unhappiness. Each of
us needs to learn to stop “giving a fuck” about the things that are causing us
pain. Choose what it is you really want to care about, and develop a more
constructive approach to work, love and life itself.

## Actionable advice: Forget FOMO and learn to say no.

If you want to focus only on the things that really matter to you, it is
vitally important to say “no!” to everything else. FOMO – the fear of missing
out – keeps us stressed, but the truth is, we’ll miss out on things no matter
what. You can’t have the perfect career, lots of family time and countless
hours to spend surfing waves on a sunny beach. It’s more important to miss out
on the right things.

So pick what’s important to you, and ignore the rest. Be totally ruthless with
this. For example, follow the path set by CEO multimillionaire Mohamed
El-Erian, who resigned from his lucrative job so that he could spend more time
with his young daughter.

Source: [Blinkist: The Subtle Art of Not Giving A Fuck](https://www.blinkist.com/books/the-subtle-art-of-not-giving-a-f-star-ck-en?r=1&st=subtle)

![blink](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/592933bbb238e10007b6b0a5/3_4/470.jpg)

## Focus on What is Important 

What’s in it for me? Learn to focus on the important things in life – and screw
the rest!

We live in an era of opportunity. Whether we want to choose a career, a partner
or the best news source, we have a multitude of options available to us. So why
isn’t it pure bliss to be alive? Why are so many of us stressed out and
unfulfilled? After all, we should have everything we want!

Well, it’s because we’re trying to do it all. 

We need to find out what is important to us, and concentrate on doing that.

Everything else? We shouldn’t give a fuck about it!  

You’ll also discover
- why you shouldn’t compare yourself to Metallica;
- that self-criticism is the key to being right; and
- why death should be the end for all of us.

## Find Your Struggle

Whatever you do in life will be a struggle, so you need to **find the struggle
that’s right for you**.

What’s your ultimate goal, the achievement you want written on your headstone?

> Unfortunately, if you want to get anywhere in life, you’ll have to struggle.

Achieving your goals will require hard work and plenty of perseverance; it’s
guaranteed that there will be setbacks and hardships on the way.

If you don’t have a goal you’re determined to achieve, you’ll falter in the
face of this adversity. 

Since struggle is unavoidable, you have to find something worth struggling for.

You have to identify what you really enjoy doing. 

There is no point looking for an easy life, one without adversity. 

Be ruthless and stop chasing the things in life that don’t make you happy.

Concentrate on the few great things – and don’t give a fuck about everything
else.

## Suffering & Metallica

Suffering can lead to great things, but if you don’t have the right values,
you’ll never be happy.

In 1983, Mustaine was thrown out of his band when they were right on the cusp
of fame. Seething with anger at the rejection, Mustaine became determined to
show his former bandmates just how wrong they’d been. For two years he worked
relentlessly to improve his skills and find the musicians to make an even
better band. The band he went on to form was Megadeth, a hugely popular band
that went on to sell over 25 million records.

However, despite the success of Megadeth, Mustaine still wasn’t happy. He
continued to judge his success against the achievements of his former band.
Unfortunately for him, this band was Metallica, one of the world’s biggest
music acts. Because he compared himself to Metallica, Mustaine considered
himself a failure, in spite of his obvious successes.

Mustaine’s persistent unhappiness highlights a common danger: **measuring one’s
success against the success of others**. For Mustaine, the only way to feel
successful was to be more successful than his former bandmates, which meant he
was doomed to disappointment.

It goes without saying that you need to find healthier values to judge your
achievements by.

So our values are more important than success when it comes to happiness. 

## Find Good Values, Not Shitty 

Many people tend to focus on shitty values, so it’s important to find some good
ones to believe in.

In the previous blink, we saw that measuring your worth by comparing yourself
to others will only lead to disappointment. And this is just one of many shitty
values that can derail you on your path to happiness.

Consider pleasure, for instance. Many people choose to make pleasure their
priority in life. And yet chasing pleasure above everything else isn’t healthy;
in fact, it’s the central value of drug addicts, adulterers and gluttons.
Research has shown that those who regard pleasure as the greatest good are
likely to be anxious and depressed.

Another shitty value is using your material success as the yardstick for your
life. Whether it be hankering after a bigger car than your neighbor's or
flashing your brand new Rolex, this value is incredibly common, and you’ve
probably bought into it at some point. But it doesn't lead to improved
well-being. Studies have shown that once our basic needs in life are cared for,
extra wealth doesn’t increase happiness. And chasing wealth can even have a
detrimental effect if we chose to pursue it over values like family, honesty or
integrity.

So how can you avoid shitty values?

Well, adherence to shitty values most often derives from a lack of worthwhile
values. So, if you want to be neither blindly hedonistic nor covetous of your
neighbor's new Mercedes, you need to identify values worth living by.  

These good values should:
- Be based in reality
- Be helpful to society
- Have an immediate and controllable effect

Take honesty. Honesty is a great value to live by because you can control it
(only you can decide to be truthful or not); it's based in reality; and,
because it provides truthful feedback to others, it's helpful.

Some other values that fulfill these three criteria are creativity, generosity
and humility.

## Responsibility vs Compulsion 

Sometimes we feel like victims, but positive change only happens when you
**take full responsibility for your life**.

Most marathon runners are proud of their achievement. Now imagine that, instead
of volunteering to run a marathon, you were forced to take part. No matter how
well you actually ran, chances are you’d detest the whole experience.

Feeling compelled to do something robs it of its joy.

## Identity and Buddhism 

We often flee when our identity is threatened, but Buddhism can help.

> **Manson’s Law of Avoidance** – the tendency to flee anything that threatens our identity.

For example, many amateur artists and writers refuse to publicize or sell their
work. They’re terrified that, should they show their art or writing, no one
would like it. Trying and failing would destroy their identity, an identity
that’s been built around the possibility of becoming a great artist. So they
never try at all.

Buddhism teaches that identity is an illusion. Whatever labels you give
yourself – rich, poor, happy, sad, successful, a failure – are merely mental
constructs. They simply aren’t real and so we shouldn’t let them dictate our
lives.

You must, therefore, learn to let go of your identity.

## Accept your Mistakes and Insecurities

You need to accept your mistakes and insecurities if you want to see positive
change.

From time to time, we all suffer from the delusion that we’re correct when
we’re not.

Quite often, our false beliefs cover up our insecurities. This means that, by
constantly questioning our decisions and actions, we’ll uncover uncomfortable
truths about ourselves.

By being ready to question your beliefs and face your insecurities, you can
behave in a healthier, happier way.

## Romantic Love Can Be Destructive

Romantic love can be destructive unless we learn to control it.

Romeo and Juliet is perhaps the most famous love story in the world. And yet
it’s hardly a happy one; it’s a rather chaotic story, involving murder, exile
and blood feuds and it ends with both lovers committing suicide.

Studies have shown that passionate, romantic relationships have a stimulating
effect on the brain similar to that of cocaine. 

Romantic love can be either unhealthy or healthy depending on whether it
fulfills specific criteria. 

Unhealthy love happens when each partner uses the relationship to run away from
their problems. For example, they might be unhappy with their lives, and so
they use their feelings for each other as a distraction. Unfortunately, no one
can mask personal problems forever, and so this avoidance-as-passion inevitably
turns sour.

Healthy love, on the other hand, exists when both partners are wholly invested
in the relationship. Rather than using it as a distraction, they are devoted to
each other. Rather than concentrate on their own feelings, each partner offers
support to their significant other. However, this support has to be desired. 

If a partner oversteps boundaries, and seeks to control the other by, for
example, looking to solve all their problems for them, problems will ensue. If
one partner seeks to dominate the other, this is clear evidence of unhealthy
love.

## Death

Humans are terrified of death, and so they try to live on beyond it.

In his book, The Denial of Death, Ernest Becker presented two main ideas.

The first is that humans are terrified of dying. 
- We can imagine what our lives might be different if we took a another path
- We can imagine what life would be like after we’ve ceased to be. 

This brings us to Becker’s second main idea – that, since we know we’re doomed
to die, we try to create a conceptual self that will live on after our demise.
In other words, we spend our mortal lives seeking out immortality projects,
things that will endure as our legacy.

It’s this desire that encourages some people to chase fame, while others may
seek to make a mark in religion, politics or business.

Yet this dream of immortality causes problems for society. People’s wish to
fashion the world, or at least a part of it, as they see fit has caused war,
destruction and misery. What’s more, it’s not healthy for us as individuals.
The desperate urge to make a mark causes us stress and anxiety.

We have to stop striving for immortality. 

We need to stop “giving a fuck” about fame and power, and instead concentrate
on the here and now. 

Look for meaning in the present and seek to spread happiness and joy where you
are.  

If you want to pursue a happy life, focus on the things you enjoy, be it the
joyful struggle or a healthy relationship. Everything else is a pointless
distraction.

