## Final summary

The key message in this book:

**Our modern lives push us into a constant state of stress and panic, and this
has major consequences on our mental and physical health. We can combat this
stress through the practice of meditation, which can ultimately lead to a more
compassionate, fulfilling and productive lifestyle.**

Actionable advice: Increase your compassion through **metta meditation**

Picture yourself clearly in your mind and repeat the following phrases: **May
you be happy, may you be healthy, may you be safe, may you live with ease.**
Then repeat the same sentences or **mantra**, this time imagining a benefactor,
a dear friend, a neutral person, a person with whom you have difficulties and
finally, all living beings.

![10% Happier](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5460dd3331363000088e0000/3_4/470.jpg)

# 10% Happier

## What’s in it for me? Learn to manage your ego and in turn, better manage your life.

How many times have you become overwhelmed by emotions – so completely ruled by
them – that in anger or desperation, you make a terrible decision that you
later end up regretting?

Or how many times has something as simple as “waking up on the wrong side of
the bed” completely ruined what could have been an otherwise pleasant day?

These blinks will show you how you can manage your emotions through meditation.
In them, the author shares his own compelling personal anecdotes so you can
better understand that the ancient art of meditation is far more than a new-age
fad – it can truly change your life.

In fact, recent scientific studies have shown that mindfulness and meditation
can have profound effects on your mental and physical health, and thus your
well-being.

Meditating can even make you more productive – regardless of how you live your
life – by helping you conquer your ego and manage your emotions.

In the following blinks, you’ll also discover:

- why being selfish isn’t such a bad thing;
- why you sometimes find yourself gazing into the fridge without being hungry;
  and
- how meditation might save you from suffering a heart attack.

## The ego is your inner narrator, or your sense of “I.” It’s the voice that tells you what to do.

We hear the word “ego” quite often. Your spouse might call you egotistical;
your best friend is egocentric; and armchair philosophers invoke Freudian
buzzwords, blaming personal shortcomings on the ego.

But the ego is far more nuanced than we give it credit. In our everyday
interactions, we often refer to the ego as the source of pride, conceit and
**amour propre**, or self-love.

To most, the ego is the source of behavior that is self-serving or unconcerned
with the well-being of others. To Freud, the ego represents a psychological
mechanism that mediates between our morality and our base desires.

But these definitions of ego still don’t get to the heart of the matter. We can
talk about deep desire or fiery pride, but we still can’t explain what’s going
on in our heads when we do strange things like open the fridge without actually
being hungry.

A better way to think of your ego – and certainly one that offers you the most
insight into your behavior – is as the **voice in your head**.

Your ego comments on your actions and behavior from the moment you open your
eyes in the morning until you drift off to sleep at night, telling you what to
do and what not to do.

This isn’t the kind of “voice in your head” that is attributed to psychosis.
Rather, you can think of it as a voice that manifests through your thoughts.

For example, your ego is the voice that tells you “I’m way too tired for the
gym” even when you know that you could really stand to break a sweat. It’s what
makes you obsessively check your emails a thousand times per day, or gaze into
the refrigerator even when you aren’t hungry.

As you’ll see, the ego is responsible for a great deal of what you do. Luckily,
taking steps to rein your ego in can make us happier and healthier.

## Your ego’s ravenous hunger for more can never be satiated. It will always push you further.

The ego is never satisfied. It will always want, it will never be content and
it will never be perfectly  happy.

By design, the ego will always want more than it already has. When the ego is
“fed” a new thing, this simply resets the baseline for desire; and immediately,
the ego begins reaching for something more.

It doesn’t matter how many material possessions you have, nor does it matter
how much money you’ve spent acquiring them – even if you don’t need it, you
still yearn for the newest sports car or that hot new gadget.

The best meals are not satisfying, even when prepared by the best chefs. Soon
you’ll become hungry and yearn for a meal that is even tastier than the last.
In essence, no matter how many times you try to satiate your ego’s desires,
your ego will only want more.

The ego is obsessed with the past and the future, and in its obsession,
neglects the present, thus keeping you from fully living in the **now**.

The ego loves especially to dwell in the past and thrives on drama by keeping
old wounds open. It’s the reason that you complain to your spouse about a work
problem at dinner, and it’s what causes you to lament being jilted by your
first love at 17, despite being happily married today.

Your ego constantly assesses your worth against the appearance, wealth and
social status of others, but will always find you failing. No matter how smart,
beautiful or wealthy you may be, according to your ego, there’s always someone
smarter, more beautiful or wealthier.

Thus, your ego will spur you to continually strive to become that “better”
person.

But after achieving what your ego wants, will you be happy?

No. The ego is never happy. Just think of all the rich, famous or fortunate
people who have committed suicide, become addicted to drugs or otherwise ruined
their lives.

The next blinks will show you how you can use meditation to calm your ego and
improve your life.

## Control your ego by practicing mindfulness and becoming more compassionate toward others.

When we practice meditation, we learn a valuable skill called **mindfulness.**

Mindfulness is the ability to respond – and not react – to our surroundings as
well as our impulses.

Meditation increases our mindfulness by instructing us to immerse ourselves
fully in the present moment, and not to be overwhelmed with life’s stressors.

For instance, when a colleague told the author that he would never become a
big-time anchorman, he used his newfound mindfulness to respond rather than
react. He didn’t let his ego and anger control him, but instead calmly asked
his boss how he could improve his work.

Mindfulness doesn’t just improve our decision making; it also changes our
biology. A Harvard MRI study observed that people who had taken an eight-week
mindfulness course through meditation had developed thicker gray matter in the
areas of the brain associated with self-awareness and compassion. Likewise,
mindfulness training appeared to shrink the regions in the brain associated
with stress.

This increase in compassionate behavior, that is, practicing concern for your
own well-being and the well-being of others, is not something to be overlooked.

Demonstrating compassion toward yourself improves your decision making by
allowing you to forgive yourself for mistakes and accept your flaws. In fact,
studies have demonstrated that people trained in self-compassion meditation are
more likely to demonstrate healthy behavior, such as quitting smoking or eating
healthier.

Likewise, being **compassionate toward others** actually helps you to become a
more fulfilled person.

One study asked participants for a few days to wear tape recorders which would
record their conversations. The recordings verified that participants who
practiced meditation were more empathic, spent more time with other people,
laughed more and used the word “I” less.

Indeed, we can use compassion for others to our own advantage. As the Dalai
Lama put it: “Be wise selfish rather than foolish selfish.”

## You don’t need to lose your edge or become a pushover when you tame your ego.

Some people dread the Buddhist concept of “letting go,” as they see it as going
soft or becoming ineffective – an act of capitulation.

For example, the American author and psychotherapist Marc Epstein often
recounts the story of his Buddhist patients who denied themselves orgasms
during sex or refused to place an order themselves at restaurants as a means of
not expressing personal preference.

Obviously, this sort of behavior did not make them happier people!

**Controlling your ego does not mean forgetting about your own needs** and
becoming a pushover.

An Indian meditation teacher named Munindra advised all of his students to keep
things “simple and easy.” One day, a student saw his teacher fiercely
negotiating over a bag of peanuts in the village marketplace. When the student
confronted him over his behavior, what he thought was a contradiction to the
simple-and-easy-mantra, Munindra replied: “I said be simple, not a simpleton!”

Controlling your ego does not mean that you have to lose your edge or stop
being a productive member of society.

In fact, according to professor Jon Kabat-Zinn, **practicing mindfulness
actually makes you more creative and more productive**, as it clears your mind
of unhelpful assumptions and routines, thus making space for new ideas and
thoughts.

During a ten-day meditation retreat, the author was flooded with ideas with
which he filled entire notebooks. He was more productive in this time of peace
and mindfulness than normally, when his mind is cluttered and chaotic.  

Interestingly, one of the most important discoveries that the author made on
his journey to tame his ego was that high levels of stress or the need for
competition weren’t necessary to fuel his drive.

Quite the contrary: he found that it was a much more satisfying exercise to
control these urges than to indulge in them.

## Meditation is a simple way to increase mindfulness and compassion in everyday life.

At this point, we’ve talked quite a lot about **meditation**. But what is it
exactly?

In essence, when you meditate, you sit comfortably and focus on your own
breath.

During this time, your mind will inevitably wander off to other things. That’s
okay! When this happens, simply refocus your mind on your breathing without
judgment.

The nice thing about meditation is that you don’t need anything to get started
– anyone can meditate anywhere.

So, meditation is easy. But what’s in it for you? Why should you bother?

For starters, meditation increases mindfulness by teaching us to view the
contents of our mind with nonjudgmental distance. According to Buddhist
teachings, we have three habitual responses to everything we experience:

- We **want** it. Think about that gut-level desire to eat a delicious cookie.
- We **reject** it. Imagine swatting at annoying mosquitos.
- We **zone out**. Have you ever listened to a flight attendant’s safety
  instructions all the way through? Yeah, right.

Mindfulness gives us a fourth option: we **observe without judgment**.

Your first experience with mindfulness during meditation often happens when you
experience some sort of uncomfortable situation, like an itchy nose or sore
legs. In these cases, you simply observe the pain with impartiality and without
reacting or moving.

Eventually, you’ll be able to apply mindfulness to more complex discomforts:
your thoughts and emotions.

In addition, meditation increases your compassion. In the month after the
author added conscious compassion to his meditation practice, he began seeing
changes in his life: he found that he was not only kinder to others, but also
to himself.

For example, he was better able to avoid gossip at work, became more empathetic
toward others and felt less annoyed by their idiosyncrasies or shortcomings.

## Meditation does a body good, helping curb the effects of stress and even disease.

Meditation is not only good for the mind; it also can have profound positive
effects on the body.

Humans still haven’t shed the “fight or flight” instinct, triggered in times of
danger. While modern life has changed our daily threats, however, from prowling
tigers to highway traffic, how stress affects our body hasn’t changed. Constant
stimulation keeps us in a state of overload, which causes high levels of toxic
stress chemicals to accumulate in our blood.

However, studies have shown that meditation can actually reverse the effects of
these stress chemicals, by lowering blood pressure and thus reducing the risk
of heart disease.  

Research also suggests that the mindfulness practiced during meditation can
spill into everyday life, leading to increased patience, empathy and
compassion.

Imagine that you are stuck in a traffic jam on your way to work. Normally, you
might react angrily and impatiently, punching your steering wheel and thinking:
“Why is this happening to me?!”

However, once you have practiced mindfulness, you will simply observe these
thoughts and let them pass without becoming consumed by them. You will not
react, but respond with sober calmness.

Other studies have shown even more obvious health benefits.

Meditation can also be beneficial in battling major depression, drug addiction,
binge eating and smoking. It can help cancer patients better handle stress and
senior citizens avoid loneliness. Meditation can also stem the effects of ADHD,
asthma, psoriasis and even irritable bowel syndrome.

Finally, meditation allows you to sculpt the one tool you have for perceiving
and experiencing the world: your brain. Indeed, studies have shown that
training your brain through meditation can improve your resilience, impulse
control and your overall level of well-being.

Yet meditation cannot rid your mind of negative thoughts altogether. But as the
final blink will show, it can still help you deal with those thoughts.

## Accept your negative emotions, then separate yourself from them through non-identification.

Meditation, however, is not a cure-all. So what should you do to help stem the
influence of negative emotions?

Psychotherapist and Buddhist teacher Tara Brach suggests that you simply
acknowledge your negative feelings – that is, admit that you’re experiencing
them, rather than deny them.

The Buddhists teach that we should “let go,” but what they really mean, is
**“let it be.”** Instead of denying “ugly” characteristics or negative
feelings, just let them be without judging yourself for having them.

Another Buddhist saying is that “the only way out is through.” Imagine those
negative feelings as a immense wave coming right toward you. The best way not
to drown is to dive **into **the wave, thus causing it to lose its power.

The author learned this the hard way after he tried to shut out all his
memories of reporting in a war zone through using drugs, instead of
acknowledging the sorrow and brutality he had witnessed.

Eventually, his refusal to manage his negative emotions in a healthy way led to
him having a panic attack on air!

There are more proactive ways of dealing with negative emotions. According to
Brach’s teachings, there are four stages to accepting these feelings.

First, you must recognize the emotion, then allow it to exist, investigate its
effects and finally separate yourself from it through the practice of
**non-identification**.

The author practiced this when he was concerned about a promotion. First, he
recognized that he was worried. Next, he convinced himself that it was okay to
be worried. Then he investigated how his body was handling the worry; he felt a
buzzing in his chest.

And finally, he practiced non-identification, telling himself that he is bigger
than his momentary concerns and that the moment would pass.

By recognizing that his fears over a promotion would not turn him into a
habitually worried person, the author was able to separate himself from his
emotions and conquer his ego.

## What to read next: 

****The Happiness Project******, by Gretchen Rubin**

Now that you’ve learned how meditation can improve your physical and mental well-being in an increasingly hectic world, it’s time to ask yourself a daunting question: **Am I happy?**

When author Gretchen Rubin asked herself this question she found that, although she had a good job, a loving family and some savings in the bank, she often felt far from happy. So she decided to go on a yearlong journey to figure out what happiness really is and how to get more of it in her life. **The Happiness Project **is the result of that journey.

To learn what she discovered – including why she started collecting bluebird figurines – get the blinks to **The Happiness Project.**

**Got feedback?**

We’d sure love to hear what you think about our content! Just drop an email to remember@blinkist.com with the title of this book as the subject line and share your thoughts!
