## The Brain
*David Eagleman*

The Brain (2015) unpacks the latest neuroscientific research and sheds light on
questions that have perplexed philosophers for millennia. What defines a
personality? Why does it keep changing? Is reality really “out there” or are we
merely hallucinating? By turns fascinating and unsettling, this is a book that
will redefine your idea of the strange and uncanny life of the mind.

Source: [The Brain by David Eagleman](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/the-brain-en)
![The Brain](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5c63d9c06cee0700078d6f2b/1_1/470.jpg)

## Final summary

Everything you’ve experienced forms who you are. More specifically, experiences
trigger reactions in your brain and this leaves a lasting mark on your
personality. This in turn shapes your brain’s perception of the world. But
nothing is fixed – you can restructure your brain. Technological advances over
the last few decades tell us that cognitive reorganization will become more
common, laying the foundation for a new “transhuman age.” But although machines
can enhance our brains, there’s one thing they can’t do – replace them.

## What’s in it for me? A brilliantly brainy book to get the gray cells going.

The mind is an uncanny thing. It’s both deeply familiar and entirely strange.

We usually think of it as a cockpit controlled by our own personality. But as
anyone who’s studied the mind – from old-school Freudians to the most
up-to-date neuroscientists – will tell you, it’s often the hidden hand of the
subconscious that’s running the show.

That’s not necessarily a bad thing. If we had to consciously process every
desire, action and gesture, life would become impossible. Simply drinking a cup
of coffee would be utterly draining.

But it does raise plenty of interesting questions. What really makes us who we
are? How do we make decisions and reach conclusions about the nature of
reality? Why do people change so radically over time?

That’s where these blinks come in. They not only answer these questions; they
provide a wide-ranging tour of the brain that is as stimulating as it is
thought-provoking.

Along the way, you’ll also learn
- why London cabbies’ brains are different from other people’s;
- how smell changes your perception of moral behavior; and
- why Botox can make you less empathetic.

## The ever-changing connections in your brain shape who you are.

Life may be unpredictable. But there is one constant – people change. Sometimes
we improve and mellow with age, like a good wine. Sometimes, like a once-decent
vintage that turns to vinegar, we sour and become unpalatable.

You may have experienced the personality-altering effects of time. Ever met up
with a friend from your school days and found yourself wondering what happened
to the person you once knew? How can someone change so much? What’s the science
behind it?

Well, it’s all about how the brain changes over time. From birth onward, our
brains are constantly making new connections and adapting to new situations.
This shapes our personalities.

Take a two-year-old child. Her brain has the same number of brain cells but
twice as many synapses – connections which transmit information – as an adult.
This is because, as humans age, they lose the synaptic connections that haven’t
been reinforced by constant repetition. Think of language. It’s difficult to
mimic or distinguish the sounds of foreign languages because you weren’t
exposed to them as a child.

This applies to personality more generally. The synaptic connections that make
you **you** are the result of everything you’ve ever been exposed to. In other
words, every person you meet, film you watch or book you read shapes who you
are!

Call it **plasticity**. That’s a fancy term for the brain’s ability to “learn”
by repetition – an ability that’s certainly not restricted to children. Adult
brains are also capable of change.

This was shown in a study carried out by scientists at University College
London. They scanned the brains of some of the city’s taxi drivers and found
that they possessed larger hippocampi – the hippocampus is the part of the
brain responsible for spatial memory – than the control group.

The explanation? Cabbies have what’s called “the Knowledge” – a precise memory
of London’s 25,000 streets, 20,000 landmarks and 320 different routes, which
each of them acquired during four years of training.

Spending so much time exercising their memories meant that the cab drivers
strengthened certain connections in their brains. It’s a bit like a workout;
the targeted area grew as a result of constant use.

That sort of change can also have a dramatic effect on personality.

Maybe you’ve heard of Charles Whitman, the man who murdered his wife and
mother, and then shot and killed another 13 people with a rifle from atop a
tower at the University of Texas, back in 1966. What you might not know is that
a postmortem carried out after he’d been shot to death found a tumor in his
brain. It was located in the part that’s responsible for fear and aggression.

The part of Einstein’s brain related to finger dexterity was larger than normal
because he was a talented violinist.

## Your sense of reality reflects your brain’s interpretation of sensory data, and it isn’t objective.

We like to think we see the world as it really is. But think back to the last
time you saw an optical illusion that made your brain suddenly register a new
image. What looked like a picture of a duck, to take a famous example, can
suddenly seem to depict a rabbit.

This demonstrates how the brain can, so to speak, change its mind about what’s
real.

One reason that happens is that it receives new information. Your sense of the
world isn’t just a product of your brain – it’s also shaped by the sensory
organs responsible for smell, taste and sight.

Take the medal-winning Paralympic skier Mike May.

He lost his sight at the age of three. In his forties, he had surgery to
restore his vision. But regaining his eyesight wasn’t an unqualified boon. He
felt overloaded and terrified. He couldn’t recognize his children. Skiing was
also suddenly a lot trickier.

That’s because his brain hadn’t learned to see. It was so used to relying on
other senses that it couldn’t process all the new information. The loss of
activity in his visual cortex as a child led his brain to overcompensate in
other areas.

So our eyes aren’t like video cameras relaying information to the brain.
Indeed, sight is actually a collaboration between these two organs. That means
that your sense of reality is a product of the way your brain **interprets
**information.

Think of synesthesia, a condition in which sensory perceptions are mixed up
with one another. People who have it report experiences such as tasting words
written on a page and hearing music as color.

In the latter case, the part of the brain that usually reacts when a person
admires, say, the colors of a sunset is just as likely to be triggered by
hearing a piece of music.

Does that mean people with synesthesia are simply hallucinating? Not at all!
Sensory organs provide the brain with information that is interpreted as
reality. But this information is never more than an **impression **of the world
“out there.”

## Most decisions are made subconsciously.

How much control do you have over your actions? As with many philosophical
questions, the answer depends on how you define your terms. If you’re using
“you” to refer to the conscious self, the truth is that you have little access
to the part of your brain that controls the steering wheel.

But that’s not as unsettling as it might sound. In fact, it’s vital to
functioning normally. Imagine having a conversation or drinking a cup of coffee
if you had to focus on every minute movement those activities involve.

The only reason these actions aren’t extremely difficult is because practiced
skills are performed subconsciously. Put simply, you’re better at doing things
when you don’t think too hard about them.

Take Austin Naber, a ten-year-old champion sport stacker. That’s a sport in
which players compete against the clock to stack cups in different shapes. He
and the author were connected to EEG machines that measure the brain’s activity
and asked to perform a cup-stacking routine.

This was a demanding task for the author because it was unfamiliar. His brain
expended huge amounts of energy trying to complete the task.

Austin’s brain, on the other hand, was at rest. He’d performed similar routines
so often that the structure of his brain had physically changed. Stacking cups
no longer required him to engage his conscious brain!

When you reach a certain level of proficiency, conscious effort actually leads
to mistakes. Baseball players, for example, hit the ball without consciously
making a decision to do so. That’s just as well, because the human brain isn’t
fast enough to accurately gauge the speed of the incoming ball and decide when
to swing the bat.

But your subconscious calls the shots even when you’re not playing competitive
sports. It’s just as likely to be in control when you’re making everyday
decisions.

Evolutionary psychologist Geoffrey Miller demonstrated this in a study that
compared how much money female dancers at strip clubs earned at various stages
of their menstrual cycle.

He found that, when dancers were ovulating, and therefore fertile, men gave
them twice as many tips as they handed out to their non-ovulating counterparts.
His explanation? Men subconsciously picked up on subtle changes in the women’s
appearances that were caused by higher estrogen levels.

Other studies report similar findings. You’re much more likely to think of
someone’s behavior as immoral if there’s a bad smell in the air. And, if you’re
holding a warm drink in your hand, you’re more likely to describe your
relationships with others warmly.

The technical term for this kind of subconscious activity is **priming**. It
basically means that sensory data influences our perceptions even when we’re
not aware of it.

**“The conscious you is no longer the driver but at best a passenger along for
the ride.”**

## Decision-making is shaped by our desires, dopamine and the brain’s preference for short-term gain.

Life is full of decisions, from mundane questions about which shoes to wear to
life-defining choices about which career to pursue. So what does that tell us
about the brain? Let’s take a closer look at how people make choices.

Here’s how it works: sensory and emotional feedback trigger different parts of
the brain until you make a decision.

Even everyday questions about what you should have for lunch can stimulate
intense neural activity. Thinking about minestrone versus broccoli soup sends
all sorts of sensory and emotional associations into overdrive.

That can create a feedback loop. If you enjoy your decision, your brain
releases dopamine. That, in turn, will become part of the argument next time
you’re confronted with a similar choice.

You can see how closely the brain and body work together by looking at cases
where the connection between the two has been severed.

Take Tammy Myers. In a motorbike accident, she damaged the part of her brain
that reports on her emotional and physical state. That means she can no longer
tell, for example, whether she’s tired, satisfied, thirsty or agitated.
Communication has broken down to such an extent that she’s incapable of
weighing up different options.

Another factor shaping decision-making is the brain’s preference for short-term
gain.

The brain doesn’t like waiting for an imagined future. Immediate rewards trump
hypothetical long-term payoffs. That’s why people take out low-interest loans
that they’re unable to repay and why married people have affairs they later
regret.

So how do you stave off temptation and play the long game? One way is to sign a
“Ulysses Contract.”

According to Greek legend, Ulysses was the captain of a ship that sailed past
an island inhabited by Sirens – dangerous creatures whose beautiful songs
hypnotized sailors, luring them into hidden rocks, upon which their vessels
would wreck. Ulysses had his crew tie him to the ship’s mast (the other sailors
stuffed their ears with cotton) to prevent him from steering the ship toward
the Sirens, and he lived to tell the tale.

What can you learn from this example?

Well, say you want to stick to your new workout schedule. Why not bind yourself
to an agreement to meet your friend at the gym? If you want to steer clear of
Facebook during exams, have a friend change your password. Giving up smoking?
Toss your cigarettes and lighters in the trash.

## Socialization is one of the brain’s main functions and it boosts the chance of group survival.

Humans are social animals. That’s reflected in the way our brains work. We’re
constantly trying to read other people and figure out who belongs to our group
and who doesn’t. How do we go about this? Through empathy – the ability to
relate to other people and their emotions.

Learning to be empathetic is all about mirroring. When we interact with other
people, we reflect their facial expressions to let our brains know what they’re
thinking and feeling. That’s one reason married couples often end up looking
alike. Years of mirroring each other’s facial expressions actually shape their
appearance, even resulting in similar wrinkle patterns!

The author wanted to find out just how important this kind of mirroring is and
conducted an experiment. He selected a group made up of people who’d had the
cosmetic injectable Botox and those who hadn’t.

After attaching the participants to a device that measures facial muscle
movement, he showed them pictures of a range of different facial expressions.

The result? The participants who’d had Botox weren’t just less facially mobile
themselves; they were also much worse at deciphering the emotions of
**others**! That’s because we read emotions by mirroring the emotions displayed
on others’ faces.

Empathy also shapes how we relate to people who belong to an **outgroup** –
that is, people who aren’t “like us” and are therefore less deserving of our
support.

Take a study carried out at the University of Leiden in the Netherlands in
which participants were shown pictures of homeless people. The participants
registered much less brain activity when shown these images than they usually
would when thinking about or interacting with people who weren’t homeless. Put
more starkly, they saw these homeless men and women as **objects**.

Media outlets and propaganda often play a decisive role in dehumanizing people
in the eyes of others. In the early 1990s, in Yugoslavia, Serbian media
channels started running stories designed to incite hatred of the Muslim
population. Claims began to circulate that Muslims were feeding Serbian
children to the lions in zoos, the aim being to make viewers regard Muslims as
a dehumanized outgroup undeserving of any empathy.

## Technology can support the functioning of the brain, but it can’t replace it.

We live in an age of unprecedented neurological and technological advances that
put yesterday’s wildest sci-fi fantasies to shame. Take the fact that we now
know that brains can adapt to non-biological signals. It’s a truly
revolutionary discovery and we still don’t know how much it may change our
lives.

Think of cochlear implants – electronic devices used by people with hearing
impairments. These relay a digital signal to the brain. It’s a bit like
learning an entirely new language; on its own, the signal is meaningless, but
when it’s cross-referenced with other senses, the brain begins to “hear” it.

That, in turn, suggests that we might soon be capable of uploading other kinds
of information directly to the brain. Imagine receiving the weather forecast,
traffic updates and push notifications **inside** your head!

Then there’s space exploration. The human body is far too fragile to survive in
space for very long. But what would happen if we could digitally upload our
brains to a more durable machine? The intergalactic frontier would suddenly be
thrown wide open.

Someday, we might be able to travel many light-years by shutting the brain down
while the machine traveled through space and then “rebooting” it when the
spacecraft reached its destination.

At the moment, computers aren’t anywhere close to being capable of such a feat,
but there’s every reason to think that they might be in the near future. After
all, computing power is now a staggering one-thousand times more powerful than
it was just 20 years ago.

Linking our brains with computing technologies would mark a turning point in
the history of humanity. It would be the beginning of an entirely new era – an
age of **transhumanism**.

But however much technologies improve and start supporting or even replacing
the human body, they’ll never be able to replace the human brain.

As the philosopher John Searle argued in the 1980s, computers can easily
surpass humans when it comes to completing tasks, but they can’t develop
awareness.

Think of it this way: When you ask Google a question, it doesn’t **understand
**you – it uses an algorithm that analyzes the words you use. Having a huge
database helps it generate answers to your questions, but that’s a far cry from
actual awareness.

To store the data of one human brain, you’d need a zettabyte of space. That’s
the equivalent of the entire digital content currently stored on earth!

### Suggested further reading: Incognito, by David Eagleman

Unbeknownst to you, a subconscious part of your brain is constantly whirring
away and wielding a tremendous influence on your thoughts, feelings and
behavior. **Incognito: The Secret Lives of the Brain** (2011) is your guide to
the other side of your brain, and how it shapes your life.

