# The Charisma Myth: How Anyone Can Master the Art and Science of Personal Magnetism Paperback – by Olivia Fox Cabane (Author) 

## Final Summary

Everyone can be charismatic; we just need to get into a suitable mindset so we
display the right body language, and practice this until it becomes
instinctive. 

There are various charisma styles to choose from, so make sure you select the
style that best suits your personality and the situation. 

Also, don’t worry if you experience mental and physical obstacles while
developing charisma; even successful people experience these things. Simply
apply the three steps to overcoming these obstacles: **dedramatize,
destigmatize and neutralize**.

## Actionable advice from the book:

**Visualization** involves imagining yourself physically performing an
activity, successfully. This exercise can be done at home, at work or even in
public, and it requires you to create a vivid mental image of a triumphant
experience in order to experience your feelings at that time; e.g., a ski team
could visualize themselves careening through the entire course, feeling their
muscles tensing, and experiencing each bump and turn. 

**Rewriting reality**. When experiencing anxiety, try using the “rewriting
reality” technique. For example, if you have an important presentation tomorrow
and you’re anxious about the outcome, take a moment to imagine and list a few
alternative outcomes, ranging from the presentation going smoothly to it
failing completely. Describe your way of speaking, what the audience looked
like, their reaction to you, and so on. As the list grows, your anxiety should
subside.

## Charisma & Success

Charismatic people have a great impact on others; 
- they're charming, persuasive and impressive – all without any apparent
  effort. 
- They lead more successful lives, too. 
- Compared with the average person, charismatic people are more attractive,
  higher earners and less stressed.

Charisma, then, is for everyone, not just leaders or business people. 

## Charisma Is Learned

People aren't born with charisma 

Charisma is not some kind of magical aura but the result of a person displaying
certain behaviors.

If we appear charismatic, it's because our body language is expressing
charisma.  

For that reason, our charisma levels fluctuate: a single person will
sometimes be perceived as charismatic and other times not.

Marilyn Monroe, was able to switch at will between her “Marilyn” and “Norma
Jean” personas. On one occasion, “Norma Jean” managed to ride the subway
without passengers noticing her.  The moment she reemerged on the New York
streets, she transformed herself into “Marilyn.” How? Simply by changing her
body language: adjusting her hairstyle and striking a pose. All eyes were
immediately on her.

Everyone can be charismatic, simply by learning, practicing and refining the
appropriate behaviors. 

## Body Language

Whether you like it or not, your body language reveals your mental state.
Anxiety, for example, produces a microexpression on your face, and observers
will sense that something's wrong.

However, since we can't consciously control every tiny expression, we can't
broadcast charismatic body language at will. For example, if you're genuinely
happy, your smile reflects it: the outer corners of the mouth rise, and the
inner corners of the eyebrows descend. 

The solution is to indirectly control our body language by influencing the part
of the mind that controls nonverbal signals: the subconscious.

Because our brains cannot differentiate imagination from reality, simply
imagining a situation causes your brain to send your body the same instructions
as it would if that situation were real. 

This process is similar to the well-known placebo effect. 

Creating the right internal state is critical to expressing charisma through
body language. And it also accounts for the next key element of charisma:
presence.

## Presence

**Presence**: being aware of what's happening, moment to moment. 

In social interactions, this means being with the other person completely, and
listening to them intently.

If you're fully present with others, you'll appear charismatic and generate
trust, rapport and loyalty. 

But if you can manage to be present, it will distinguish you from the crowd,
and people will feel special around you. Just a five-minute conversation with a
stranger is enough to impress them and establish a bond. People will sense your
full attention and feel that in this moment they are the most important thing
in the world to you.

The ability to be present makes you so charismatic that you can establish an
emotional connection with another person in just five minutes.

## Power for Good

We subconsciously view the combination of power and warmth as extremely
positive, so we look for signs of it in others and try to keep as friends those
who possess it.

Compare, for example, the two candidates in Great Britain's 1868 elections,
William Gladstone and Benjamin Disraeli, both of whom projected power,
intelligence and knowledge. One woman who dined with each of them, separately.
The woman later said, “After dining with Mr. Gladstone, I thought he was the
cleverest person in England. But after dining with Mr. Disraeli, I thought I
was the cleverest person in England.” 

## Charisma Styles

There are four distinct charisma styles:
- **Focus** charisma lets people know you're fully present – a good example is
  Bill Clinton.
- **Visionary** charisma inspires people or gets them to believe in something,
  much like Steve Jobs did.
- **Kindness** charisma makes others feel seen and accepted – just look at the
  Dalai Lama.
- **Authority** charisma makes others believe you have the power to change
  their lives, much like Bill Gates does.

When choosing a style, don’t go against your natural personality, as this can
be counterproductive. 

For example, in the 2004 US elections, John Kerry “dumbed down” his focused,
intellectual charisma in an attempt to be more accessible.  The strategy
backfired, alienating those who liked his original personality, and making him
appear disingenuous.

In terms of goals, consider how you want people to feel and respond to you. For
example, if you're delivering bad news, kindness is the best choice – it makes
the other person feel more comfortable about accepting the news. 

## First Impressions

We all tend to remember the “firsts” – the first time we met someone, for
instance. This means first impressions are very important, especially as we
only get one chance to make a great one.

To make a great first impression, you have to make others feel you're similar
to them.

People feel most comfortable with those who behave and appear as they do

Once you've made a favorable first impression on someone, it will color the
rest of the relationship. This is because, as economist John Kenneth Galbraith
believes, we seek to reaffirm our first impressions rather than revise them.

And first impressions are often proven right: in one study, it was found that
after looking at a single photograph, subjects could accurately judge most
personality traits of the person depicted (for example, their extraversion, or
conscientiousness).

So, begin that first meeting by complimenting the other person or asking
open-ended questions, and stick to positive subjects. 

Don't underestimate the handshake – it requires trust, so it's an important
step in intimacy. 

## Overcoming Mental and Physical Discomfort.

Feeling discomfort, whether physical or mental, can affect your performance and
emotions, as well as others' perception of you.

Being hungry, for example, will probably cloud your thinking, and low blood
sugar can impair your attention and emotional control. 

Mental discomfort, such as anxiety or self-criticism, can have the same effect.

So, here are three ways to counteract discomfort: 
- **Prevent** means to ensure your comfort by planning ahead. 
- **Recognize** relates to being present: the more present you are, the more
  aware of your body language you will be. 
- **Remedy** or explain.  The more aware you are, the easier it is to remedy or
  explain the problem.

## Dedramatize

What's happening isn't serious, and lots of others are going through it.

Remember you're not alone in the experience and that what's happening isn't
really serious.

Another way to dedramatize is to imagine the negative emotion is being
experienced by a community of people rather than just you alone. Doing this
will relieve you, as you'll realize it's not wrong to think or feel as you do.

Think about people who've already been through a similar experience, especially
those you admire, and trust that they experienced the same thoughts and
feelings as you.

Dedramatizing can also help with an emotion that is particularly damaging to
charisma: **shame**. When you're ashamed, you don't appear charismatic, as your
body language isn't projecting power, warmth or presence.

## Destigmatize and Neutralize

Negative thoughts are nothing to feel bad about, and they’re not necessarily
real.

Experiencing internal discomfort and negativity is a natural part of human
life, even for the most balanced among us. 

Consider that even devout Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh was once so infuriated
by someone that he felt like punching him. 

Another way to overcome discomfort is to neutralize your negativity by
realizing that your thoughts are not necessarily accurate. 

For example, if we feel bad because someone has reacted negatively to us, we
should consider that the reaction might have nothing to do with us – that
person could be struggling to manage their own physical or mental discomfort.

The reason we're so affected by our negative thoughts is that we believe our
minds perceive reality accurately. But in fact our minds do not give us a
complete and accurate image of reality; instead, we perceive only the small
amount of information that's most relevant and important to us.

