# Arise, Awake by Rashmi Bansal

Arise, Awake (2015) introduces readers to some of India’s most inspiring
up-and-coming entrepreneurs. Drawn from a wide variety of different educational
and geographical backgrounds, these young guns have established themselves in
industries as diverse as the construction sector, student housing and fast
food. The one thing they have in common? They took matters into their own hands
rather than waiting for the perfect opportunity to drop into their laps.

## Final summary

It doesn’t matter where or what you study, you can turn your dreams of business
success into reality – and you don’t even have to wait till you’re through with
school! As these six young Indian go-getters’ stories show, what really makes
the difference when it comes to getting a company off the ground is
determination, elbow grease and a thick skin. So if you’re sitting on the next
big thing, get out there and start hustling! 

## Actionable advice:

**Get your product out in the world ASAP!**

Ideas are great, but nothing gets the ball rolling like putting your product
out in the world. So once you’ve developed your product idea, don’t hesitate –
hit Google and find your material suppliers and start putting your prototype
together. Once you’ve done that, you’ll need to begin road-testing it – after
all, no one can help you figure out whether you’re onto a winner like the
people who’ll be using your product.

## What’s in it for me? Inspiring insights into India’s next generation of entrepreneurs.

Source: [Arise, Awake by Rashmi Bansal](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/arise-awake-en)

![Arise, Awake](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5ce50ad66cee0700086aaf90/1_1/470.jpg)

The world’s economic center of gravity is shifting eastward. Few nations better
encapsulate that transition than India, a country of 1.3 billion people with an
economy that’s been growing at a rate of over five percent annually for over a
decade now. Much of this growth has come from a new generation of
entrepreneurs, young go-getters who are redefining the way business in India is
done.

But facts and figures only tell half the story. If you really want to
experience what this golden age of entrepreneurship feels like on the ground,
you have to get up close and personal with the men and women reshaping the
subcontinent.

That’s just what Rashmi Bansal does in these blinks. Chock-full of inspiring
insights and real-life tales of grit and determination, these portraits of six
up-and-coming entrepreneurs whisk readers from Bombay to Bangalore and reveal
how the new generation is redefining the business landscape in today’s India.

You’ll also discover:
- how a failed beverage venture ended up launching a top youth brand to
  success;
- why businesses that solve problems close to home go on to thrive; and
- how a software start-up attracted the attention of Silicon Valley venture
  capitalists.

## Practo Technologies was born in an entrepreneurship nursery in Karnataka.

Back in the early 2000s, “entrepreneurship” wasn’t a particularly well-known
concept in India. One university wanted to change that. The National Institute
of Technology Karnataka – NITK for short – was one of the few places you could
find an entrepreneurship cell in the country. Its so-called Eforea “E-cell” was
designed as a launching pad for talented youngsters working on the next big
thing.

Shashank ND, an NITK student from Bangalore, joined Eforea in his second year.
Up to that point he’d been a pretty average student who’d only really
distinguished himself in extracurricular campus activities. The events
organized by the e-cell, however, changed the course of his life. Listening to
top business gurus like rediff.com founder Ajit Balakrishnan talk about their
experiences helped Shashank discover his true vocation: entrepreneurship.

He didn’t have to look far for a partner, either – his future collaborator
Abhinav Lal was also an Eforea member.

The two would-be world-changers started small. Their idea? To create software
for doctors. After borrowing 10,000 rupees – roughly USD $145 – from Shashank’s
mother, they registered their company under the name Practo Technologies.
Things were still fairly vague, but that didn’t deter Shashank and Abhinav. The
duo organized a big presentation and invited 25 local doctors. But the event
was a disaster. Shashank felt uncomfortable in his ill-fitting suit, and their
business pitch largely fell on deaf ears.

One medical practitioner in the room – Mohammed Ali – wasn’t quite so quick to
dismiss what he’d heard. He told the two budding entrepreneurs to persevere,
and even gave them an idea to work on. Ali had noticed that his patients often
needed to be reminded of their regular checkups. Wouldn’t it be simpler, he
wondered, if those reminders could be automated? Shashank and Abhinav got to
work designing the software to do just that.

Their prototype was simple, but Ali was delighted with the automated SMS
reminders it sent out. Encouraged by this success, the NTIK graduates committed
their futures to Practo. In 2010, their hard work paid off. Sequoia Capital, an
American venture capital firm that had backed Apple and Google in the tech
giants’ early days, decided to invest in the medical start-up. It was exactly
the boost Practo needed.

By 2015, the firm was worth almost three million US dollars, and its services
were being used by 10,000 doctors across India.

## Sourabh Bansal turned the Indian quicklime industry on its head with an innovative new product.

Sourabh Bansal’s story starts in a student dorm or, as it’s called in India, a
hostel. It was one of those wide-ranging, late-night discussions that take
place among undergraduates the world over. What, they asked each other, would
they do with their lives? Sourabh leaped to his feet, grabbed a pencil and
scribbled a number on the wall: 50 billion rupees. That, he said, was how much
his company would be worth one day.

How was he going to make all that cash? That’s where serendipity played its
part. Sourabh’s father owned a factory manufacturing quicklime, a compound used
by the building industry to make concrete blocks. Sourabh had occasionally
helped out in the plant for years. One day, he noticed an unusual order: a
customer had purchased thousands of tons of lime to make “autoclaved aerated
concrete,” or AAC blocks.

When he looked into the matter, Sourabh discovered that these were ten times
larger than standard bricks and a whopping 70 percent lighter. The only issue
with this wonder material was that it was prohibitively expensive. That was
Sourabh’s eureka moment. Whoever figured out how to lower the cost of AAC
blocks would practically conquer an entire market overnight!

The wheels were in motion, and Sourabh began experimenting with cheaper
production techniques. All he needed was someone to help him get his idea off
the ground. In Surat, Sourabh’s hometown in western India, investors usually
take the form of “uncles” – wealthy family acquaintances willing to take a
gamble on new businesses. The uncle who invested in Sourabh’s company was
called Rajesh Poddar. In return for a 70 percent equity stake, Poddar invested
100 million rupees in what became Magicrete Building Solutions.

It was a sound decision. Sourabh’s experiments were successful: using a
coal-fired boiler instead of the diesel boilers other firms relied on, he’d
reduced his manufacturing costs by over 60 percent. By 2009, Magicrete’s first
AAC blocks were rolling off the production line. It didn’t take the
construction industry long to cotton on, and orders were soon flying in.

It wasn’t all plain sailing from there, but Magicrete continued to expand at a
steady clip. Six years later, it was bringing in 1.5 billion rupees a year and
was well on its way to that 50 billion goal!

## Sacred Moments used a TV contest as a launchpad for its business success.

The Symbiosis Centre for Management and Human Resources Development is known as
the best place to study HR in India. It was that reputation that brought
Prakash Mundhra to the university, but he soon decided he’d had enough and
devoted himself to entrepreneurship instead.

Increasingly fascinated by the business world, Prakash began working on his own
ideas. That’s when he came across **Business Baazigar**, a TV show on which
contestants submit their business plans and winners receive the funding they
need to turn their dreams into reality. The format was perfect for an idea
Prakash had been developing for a school competition: kits containing full sets
of the items used in **puja **or “worship” on special occasions like the Hindu
festival of Diwali.

Around 200,000 business plans were submitted to **Business Baazigar**, but
Prakash managed to squeeze into the top twenty. He was given 50,000 rupees to
create a prototype and invited to appear on the actual show when filming
started in February 2005. Although he was eventually eliminated after joining
the final round of ten contestants, the experience played a vital role in
Prakash’s career. Being challenged to produce a sample product gave him a much
better understanding of the raw materials he’d need, the size of the market and
the competition he’d face.

Even more importantly, it gave him the confidence to continue refining his
business idea. Prakash returned to school, but his heart wasn’t in it – what he
really wanted to do was continue developing his business. He began applying to
business plan contests at schools across India, winning five out of the six he
entered. After graduating, he was finally ready to set up his own company.
Named Sacred Moments, it initially specialized in Diwali “puja kits,” which
sold like hotcakes. Prakash then began expanding his product line to cater to a
wider range of festivities and occasions.

Today, Sacred Moments has seven full-time employees and many more seasonal
workers. The hours might be long, but that doesn’t bother Prakash one bit – he
loves his work and believes he’s privileged to be able to work for himself and
on his own ideas.

## Prabhkiran Singh couldn’t have created Bewakoof Brands if his beverage business hadn’t failed first.

Like many of the entrepreneurs we’ve met so far, Prabhkiran Singh wasn’t really
sure what he wanted to do with his life when he went to university. He worked
hard at the Indian Institute of Technology in Bombay, but he knew the subject
he was studying – civil engineering – wasn’t his true calling.

What Prabhkiran **was** sure about was that he wanted to work for himself, but
he couldn’t settle on a business idea. That changed in 2009 after he happened
to try a flavored **lassi**, an Indian drink traditionally made with yoghurt,
water, salt and spices. The strawberry-flavored lassi Prabhkiran tried was a
different beverage altogether. Inspired by the idea of creating a more modern
style of lassi, he and his best friend pooled their savings to buy a mixer, a
blender and some basic kitchen tools.

They eventually rented a small space outside a cake shop for the equivalent of
about USD $86. In February 2010, Khadke Glassi opened its doors. Thanks to
Facebook advertising and word of mouth, news of the venture spread. Soon
enough, thirsty customers were lining up to try the company’s lassis. By June,
things were going so well that Prabhkiran decided to open a second location in
a shopping center. There was just one catch: sales were heavily reliant on the
weather. When it changed for the worse, Khadke Glassi went from selling 50 to
just five glasses a day. That wasn’t sustainable, and in September the business
closed its doors for good.

Failure is bitter, but – as Prabhkiran would discover – it can impart useful
lessons. As he was shuttering his lassi business, he noticed his friend
Siddharth tinkering with a humorous website he’d created called Bewakoof,
meaning “foolish” in Hindi. Prabhkiran had a flash of inspiration and decided
to team up with Siddarth and make t-shirts promoting the site. Finding
investors to back this new venture wasn’t easy, but his experience with Khadke
Glassi had given Prabhkiran a thick skin. He persevered and eventually received
seed funding from a fellow university student.

Bewakoof Brands, as the company was now called, gradually established itself as
one of India’s most exciting youth brands, selling over 200 shirts a day. By
2014, it had 150 employees and an annual turnover of 500 million rupees – not
bad for a venture dreamed up in the wreckage of a failed business!

## Bhukkad’s “natural fast food” started out as an answer to a problem close to home.

Every young Indian who wants to study law dreams of being admitted to the
National Law School in Bangalore. Not everyone makes it through the rigorous
application process, but Aruj Garg did. After a brief honeymoon period, he had
a change of heart: what really interested him wasn’t law but entrepreneurship.

No wonder – business is all about solving problems, and Aruj was a natural
problem-solver. Even better, he’d come up with an answer to a problem familiar
to students across India: poor-quality canteen food. Realizing there was a huge
market for tastier alternatives, he put together a crowd-pleasing menu
featuring pizza, sandwiches and burgers inspired by the fast food chain Subway.
He rented a small space near campus for 1000 rupees a month and opened his
restaurant in May 2011. Its name? Bhukkad, Hindi slang for a food-obsessed
person. It was a hit: within a month, Aruj was making between 2000 and 3000
rupees a day.

The business might have been sustainable but Aruj’s eating habits weren’t. In
2013, he discovered that his cholesterol levels were dangerously high and he’d
have to cut down on processed foods, including all-time personal favorites like
chips and ice cream. That severely limited his options when it came to eating
out. It was the start of a thought process that would culminate in Bhukkad 2.0
– a restaurant serving delicious food that was both fast and healthy.

Shifting his focus to natural and fresh ingredients, Aruj came up with a new
“Bhukkad Code” which banished processed meat, white bread and pre-packaged
dressings and sauces from the company’s menu. These were replaced by offerings
like the signature Asian green salad – a mix of beans, cauliflower and lettuce
finished with a lime-honey dressing and peanut garnish. Bhukkad’s high-quality,
health-conscious fast food was an even bigger hit than the carb-driven fare it
had previously sold, driving sales up by 30 percent!

Today, Bhukkad has three full-time employees in three outlets and is looking to
expand once it finds the right investor. Aruj, meanwhile, is still in his
twenties!

## Anurag Arora created Ganpati Facilities to spare other students his own housing problems.

There’s clearly plenty of money to be made satisfying students’ hunger, but
what about their need for accommodation?

Like canteens, student digs often leave a lot to be desired. Take it from
Anurag Arora. When he started his course at the ICFAI Business School in Pune,
Maharashtra, he was asked to pay 48,000 rupees up-front to live in a privately
run hostel, as the university didn’t have its own dormitories. That’s a lot of
cash for what he got: a shabby room in a run-down, badly managed building that
didn’t even have hot water! Anurag stuck it out for three days before deciding
he’d had enough and moving into a private apartment with a couple of pals,
forfeiting his entire downpayment.

In the summer of 2013, Anurag noticed that incoming students were posting
questions about their future accommodation on the university’s Facebook page.
By that point, the campus had moved to a different neighborhood in Pune where
there weren’t even private hostels. That’s when Anurag hit on the idea of
opening a hostel of his own. Because he was known as a good student, the school
took his scheme seriously.

Having been given the go-ahead, and with the new students due to arrive in just
a couple of weeks, Anurag got to work. He reached out to apartment brokers and
started inspecting suitable properties. But there was a snag: he didn’t have
any start-up capital. Rather than letting that deter him, he used his own
apartment to showcase his service and promised students that their own rooms
would be just as clean and well-furnished as his.

When his first client signed on the dotted line and paid the 56,000 rupees in
annual fees, Anurag had enough money to cover the deposit on his first five
apartments. Furnishing one of those gave him a new model for future customers.
After that, things started to snowball: new clients provided more cash, which
in turn paid for the deposits on more apartments. Anurag’s company, Ganpati
Facilities, was soon making a net profit of 2.5 million rupees every month!

That’s a great example of how far a bit of lateral thinking and lots of
determination can get you. Like the other entrepreneurs we’ve encountered in
these blinks, Anurag didn’t wait for the perfect job to drop into his lap – he
went out there and created it for himself.

## What to read next: The Entrepreneur Roller Coaster, by Darren Hardy

If the lesson you’ve taken away from these blinks is that anyone can turn their
brilliant idea into a money-spinner, great – that was the idea! But even if
you’re 99 percent sure that you’re onto a winner, there’s always that niggling
one percent of doubt to hold you back. That’s hardly surprising: going it alone
can be pretty scary, especially when you’re used to the certainty of a monthly
paycheck.

But you don’t have to reinvent the wheel – in fact, you’re best off learning
from the entrepreneurial veterans who’ve already been through the process. So
if you want the lowdown on everything a self-starter needs to know about sales,
leadership, recruiting and productivity, check out our blinks to **The
Entrepreneur Roller Coaster**, by Darren Hardy.

