# The Five Dysfunctions of a Team
*By Patrick M. Lencioni*

Source: [Blinkist: The Five Dysfunctions of a
Team](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/reader/the-five-dysfunctions-of-a-team-en)

![The Five Dysfunctions of a
Team](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/52f1195c35653600110b0000/3_4/470.jpg)

## What is in it for me: learn how to build and maintain a great team

Anyone who has ever had to work with other people to achieve something
important has no doubt realized how crucial, and yet difficult, teamwork is.
Indeed, great teamwork does not happen by accident; it requires concerted and
deliberate efforts. This is because teams are inherently dysfunctional: they
are made up of imperfect individuals who have egos and selfish goals.

Luckily, it is possible to achieve great teamwork by using certain tools and
principles. Understanding how to implement them is crucial for any team leader.

For example, team leaders must build trust within the team so that members are
comfortable engaging each other in conflict. Leaders must also set and monitor
team goals so everyone stays focused. It is equally important for leaders to
act as role models, exemplifying good teamwork themselves.

The book answers many essential questions about teamwork, such as:
- Why is it so important to focus on teamwork, even if the team already has
  many great individuals?
- Why is trust crucial, and why does it require team members to share
  weaknesses and mistakes openly?
- How can team members be encouraged to focus on team results rather than
  individual goals?

The next eight blinks present the key ideas from the book.

## Teamwork is the ultimate competitive advantage; make it your top priority.

While it’s hard to define exactly what makes a team great, one clear trait is
commonly acknowledged: great teams amount to more than the sum of their
individual constituents. This can be seen, for example, in basketball, where a
cohesive team of average players will routinely beat a more dysfunctional team
of star players.

So why do even the most talented teams tend to perform poorly in the absence of
teamwork?

They waste time and energy on politics, trying to outmaneuver each other. This
results in low morale, less focus on performance and the loss of valuable
players who have had enough.

Consider the example of a Silicon Valley technology company called
DecisionTech. It was once seen as an extremely promising start-up, but it’s
situation deteriorate quickly until its future looked bleak – it was struggling
to find customers, despite having an experienced (and expensive) executive
team, a very talented pool of engineers and more top-tier investors than most
start-ups dare dream of.

Why?

The root cause was a lack of teamwork among the company’s leadership. In teams
of ambitious and successful people, individual egos can hinder good teamwork as
people compete against their peers.

Happily, poor teamwork can be fixed. This is precisely what Kathryn Peterson
set out to do as the new CEO of DecisionTech. She prioritized teamwork even
above hitting immediate financial targets, and by doing so, helped get the
company back on track.

Next, find out why trust is the basis of all teamwork.

## All teamwork is based on trust, and trust is built when team members are open about their weaknesses and mistakes.

As most people know, trust and respect are the foundation of any relationship.
But they’re also the basis of great teamwork. Why?

For a team to perform well, members must trust one another. When this is the
case, they will communicate in a healthy, open way even when discussing tough
or touchy topics. This allows them to find the best solutions quickly. Without
trust, important issues may be avoided and left undebated, which results in
poor decisions.

The departure of the head of sales at DecisionTech is a good example of the
kind of open communication that trust fosters. Naturally, a replacement was
needed, and Carlos Amador, the head of customer support, suggested he take the
position. The rest of the team felt that other team members had better
experience and were more suitable for the job, and since the team had a solid
foundation of trust, they felt comfortable voicing this opinion. Carlos in turn
was not offended, and accepted that the chief operations officer would be a
better candidate.

If the team had not built up trust, this situation could have resulted in a
tricky conflict of egos, where Carlos would not have been willing to back down.

So how can trust be built?

Put simply, team members need to willingly make themselves vulnerable to one
another. This is not easy to do, as in today’s cut-throat world people learn to
be competitive and protective of their own interests.

But for trust to be built, everyone must see that there is no reason to be
protective or careful in the team. This means team members must make a
deliberate effort to quash their basic caution, and instead share their
vulnerabilities and mistakes openly. This way everyone will quickly be able to
see that their peers’ intentions toward them are good, and trust will develop.

But who should be the first to share their vulnerabilities? Read on to find
out.

## The first step towards trust is a team leader who is vulnerable and admits their own mistakes and weaknesses.

Trust is the foundation of teamwork, which is why one of the most important
responsibilities of a team leader is to encourage their team to build trust.

Trust is built when team members openly share their shortcomings, weaknesses
and mistakes without worrying about being vulnerable. This is because the team
members begin to understand each other better when they get a full picture of
their peers – knowing their weaknesses makes them less concerned about
revealing their own.

At DecisionTech, to encourage trust building, Kathryn conducted a session where
team members shared strengths and weaknesses. This simple exercise helped the
team begin to develop trust in each other.

But while such exercises are valuable, the first and most important step is for
the team leader to lead by example by being the first one to demonstrate
vulnerability. This indicates to the team that the environment does not punish
vulnerability.

For example, at DecisionTech, Kathryn shared her weaknesses early on to start
the trust-building process. She explained what kind of management mistakes she
had made in the past and admitted that she had been fired from her job once
before.

This kind of willingness by the leader to demonstrate vulnerability encourages
subordinates to take similar risks themselves.

Next, you’ll see why trust is the key ingredient that fuels constructive
conflict.

## If people trust each other, they engage in constructive conflicts and make better decisions.

Most people think of conflict as an inherently negative thing, but
**constructive conflict **is in fact important for any team to make the best
possible decisions.

This is because decision making benefits from having varied, often clashing
perspectives. Open and free debate on the merits and faults of every idea
results in a better outcome. So, in this sense, some conflict is beneficial,
but it must be constructive in nature – meaning everyone should be focused on
the topic at hand, rather than on their own agenda or intra-team politics.

If a team lacks trust, this often means that they will want to avoid any and
all conflict, so they shy away from discussing controversial topics. They hold
back their opinions and honest concerns, preferring not to challenge one
another, because they are trying to uphold some kind of pseudo-harmony within
the team.

For example, when Kathryn first arrived at DecisionTech, she found that there
was hardly any debate in the leadership team’s meetings. This is because they
did not trust each other enough to discuss difficult yet vital topics.

So if constructive conflict is crucial for making the best decisions, and trust
is crucial for conflict, it becomes clear that a team must build trust if
they’re to find the best possible solutions to any challenges.

Building trust enables conflict, because team members who trust each other will
be comfortable even when engaging in a passionate and emotional debate over a
tricky issue, because they know that nothing they say will be interpreted as
destructive.

To foster healthy debate at DecisionTech, Kathryn encouraged trust through
team-building efforts. Eventually, team members developed such an excellent
rapport with each other that they started engaging in healthy debates, even
about formerly controversial topics. Trust spurred debates and constructive
conflict, which in turn made this team healthier and more effective at finding
the right decisions.

But what if no consensus is reached? As you’ll soon find out, this may not be
as bad as it sounds.

## Everybody has to be committed to a decision, even if there is no consensus or certainty about its correctness.

Most people have, at some point in their lives, been unfortunate enough to sit
in a meeting where decisions have been made, only for people to keep
second-guessing the decisions so that nothing actually gets done.

One of the key traits of great teams is that they are able to make decisions
and then stand by them. This is because they know that any decision is better
than no decision at all, especially when it comes to important ones.

They commit to the decisions they make, because they know that lack of
commitment creates ambiguity. In the leadership team of a company, this results
in misaligned goals and priorities, and these misalignments become even more
extreme as they trickle down to employee level.

In a great team, decisions are made so that everyone can buy into them.

How can this be achieved?

It is very difficult to find consensus in any team setting, as different
perspectives and opinions will always prevail. Forcing a consensus in such a
setting would mean finding a solution that pleases everyone, and this is rarely
productive.

Instead, great teams understand consensus to mean that everyone is committed
and understands the greater goal, even if the decision made is not the one they
voiced.

To get there, great teams ensure everyone has a chance to express their
opinion. This lets everyone feel that they have been heard, and often this is
already enough. Most reasonable people do not insist on their opinion always
prevailing, but are satisfied when their input has been considered and
addressed. When everyone’s ideas are given genuine thought, the team is then
more willing to rally around team decisions. This is why in great teams you’ll
often find people committing fully to the group’s decisions, even if they had
argued passionately against that very decision earlier.

## Great teams have peer-to-peer accountability, meaning everyone’s performance is transparent.

One of the most uncomfortable moments imaginable in any team occurs when you
have to point out to a peer that he or she is performing below expectations or
behaving inappropriately. This is awkward because most people feel like they
are sticking their nose into someone else’s business, or artificially elevating
themselves above their supposed peer.

Unfortunately, if team members do not call each other out in such cases, it
will make everyone feel less accountable, which in turn results in missed
deadlines, mediocre results and poor team performance. The team leader is then
burdened with being the sole source of discipline in the team, as there is no
peer-to-peer accountability.

For example, at DecisionTech, when one employee missed his deadline for a
competitor analysis, Kathryn reminded the rest of the team that they should
have addressed the issue earlier. It was obvious that the analysis would not be
done on time, and the rest of team should have challenged the person
responsible to spur him to action.

In some teams, when members have developed good rapport, they are then
reluctant to hold one another accountable, because they fear their valuable
personal relationships will be jeopardized. Ironically, this reluctance can and
will damage those personal relationships, because the team members will begin
to resent each other for not living up to expectations and for slipping from
the team’s performance standards.

However, members of great teams do hold one another accountable and this
actually improves their relationships, because they develop respect for each
other for adhering to the same high standards. When there is trust in a team,
the members who are pushed to perform better will understand that it is being
done for the common good, and not take it personally.

At the end of the day, peer pressure is by far the most efficient and effective
means of maintaining high standards of performance. Individuals who fear
letting down teammates they respect will naturally feel pressure to work hard
and improve their performance.

This is why peer-to-peer accountability is a key component in enhancing team
performance.

## Effective teams focus on collective results rather than individual goals.

Every team has goals that they strive for, results they wish to achieve –
whether it is to design a new product line or win a game of basketball. This is
true for most individuals as well, but in great teams, team members understand
that shared goals must take precedence over individual ones.

As an example, consider Kathryn’s husband, a basketball coach, who had to drop
one of his most talented players. Why? The player in question did not care if
the team won or lost; all he cared about was how many points he scored. In
short, his individual goals were more important for him than team goals, and so
he had to go.

If people like this remain on a team, the team will forget about its collective
goals and rapidly lose its competitive edge. Members start to focus on their
own careers, so progress stagnates. Eventually, the best team members who were
willing to work for the common goal realize that this is not a good team for
them, and so they leave to join a better one. This exacerbates the situation
further.

So what kind of common goals keep the team focused? Clearly defined ones that
are easy to measure.

If the intended results are clear and leave no room for interpretation, then
it’s not possible for any individual to weasel away from the team goal to work
on their own goals instead.

For example, at DecisionTech the clear and measurable goal of having 18
customers by the end of the year was set, and everyone united behind it.

When common goals are embraced, individual team members are willing to support
and help each other even across lines of responsibilities.

At DecisionTech, this meant that the engineering department was willing to
mobilize its resources to help the sales team with its product demonstrations.
This was the best way that they could help to get more customers and meet the
common goal.

## Great teams spend a lot of time together, which results in them saving a lot of time.

Much as a rowing boat will go nowhere if every oarsman rows in a different
direction, a team will go nowhere if they don’t agree on where they are going.

So what can be done to resolve such ambiguity or indecision?

The key is for teams to meet regularly, as there are multiple benefits to this.

Firstly, it helps members develop good rapport and trust, which already helps
them resolve any issues quickly and effectively.

Secondly, conflicts are easier to resolve face-to-face, and it is far easier to
gather arguments and counterarguments from all team members in real time when
they are all situated in the same space.

Thirdly, in face-to-face meetings, team members have better insight into what
each of them is doing and how their skills might be leveraged in other areas as
well, so there is less risk of redundant work.

For example, at DecisionTech, many of the team’s inefficiencies were resolved
by Kathryn “forcing” team members to spend considerable time together. Around
eight days per fiscal quarter was spent in meetings like the annual meeting,
the quarterly off-site meetings, the weekly staff meetings and ad hoc topical
meetings.

When a team has developed good rapport, they are better positioned to work in
sync. For example, overlapping work is avoided when each team member sees what
the others are up to. Also, resources are allocated smartly, because team
members immediately see where their skills and knowledge could be used to help
each other.

So in conclusion, regular meetings and touch points help great teams be
coordinated and efficient, and this saves a lot of time, even if much time
needs to be invested at first.

## Final summary


Great teamwork is a powerful competitive advantage, but it is very rare because
organizations have a hard time avoiding the natural dysfunctions that teams
face. The foundations for great teamwork can be laid by building trust,
engaging in constructive conflict, committing to decisions, holding peers
accountable and focusing on common goals.

Actionable ideas: **Lead by example**

If you’re a team leader and you wish to build trust by encouraging others to
share their vulnerabilities, you must first do so yourself. One good way to do
this is to share some personal stories about yourself, and then ask others to
do the same. You can also use personality tests like the Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator test to spur conversation about what kind of people team members are,
so that better understanding is achieved.

**Set clear goals and follow them**

Whenever you find yourself in a team, whether leading it or just participating,
insist on setting public goals and quality standards. Also, demand they be
followed with simple and regular progress reviews. This will help keep everyone
focused on team goals, and also encourage accountability. And don’t forget:
shared goals demand shared rewards, like a team event.
