# The Gatekeepers: How the White House Chiefs of Staff Define Every Presidency by Chris Whipple

Source: [Blinkist: The Gatekeepers](https://www.blinkist.com/books/the-gatekeepers-en?r=1&st=gatekeepers)
![blinkist](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5aba41ceb238e100066bfcd9/3_4/470.jpg)

## Final summary

Since the Nixon administration, every White House has been defined by its chief
of staff. By organizing the president’s agenda and daily schedule, the chief of
staff acts as a gatekeeper to the leader of the free world. It’s a job with
immense power that’s often been overlooked. While the role has changed over
different administrations, it remains to this day a vital position in the White
House.

## Actionable advice:

**Manage the information flow.**

Just like a president with no good chief of staff, you too can feel overwhelmed
by the amount of incoming information. Why not spend half an hour setting up
some proper email filters so that your phone doesn’t ping for every little
subscription you’re signed up to?

## What’s in it for me? Understand the inner workings of the White House.

There’s a story from the early days of the Eisenhower administration.
Supposedly, soon after Eisenhower arrived at White House following his
inauguration on 20 January 1953, a staffer came running up. He had a sealed
envelope in hand, marked “private and confidential.”

Much to his surprise, the staffer got an earful. “Never bring me a sealed
envelope!” yelled Eisenhower, “that’s what I’ve got aides for.”

He had a point. It wasn’t that Eisenhower was upset because he hated opening
his mail. Rather, he knew that structures had to be in place to ensure that
nothing was a surprise by the time it reached him. He knew he had to have
capable, trustworthy and intelligent staff upon whom he could rely. He needed
his gatekeepers.

The role of White House chief of staff embodies the concept of gatekeeper. At
first, it was a relatively informal position, but now it is seen as one of the
most important posts in the White House.

The story of the gatekeepers is one of power, control and influence. You’ll see
how the greatest office of state in the world is run. But one thing will become
clear: It’s not so much a question of who holds the reins of power, but who
lets him hold them in the first place.

In this pack, you’ll learn
- which gaffe cost President Ford the 1976 election;
- which chief of staff later went on to change geopolitics;
- how the 2008 financial crash could have been much worse without one chief of
  staff.

## The role of chief of staff took its current form during Richard Nixon’s presidency.

Richard Nixon’s reputation isn’t great these days, but he shaped the modern
presidency through his use of a dedicated chief of staff.

Nixon’s Democratic predecessor, Lyndon B. Johnson – usually known as LBJ –
hated the idea of concentrating power in one chief adviser. Instead, LBJ got
personally embroiled in all the organizational aspects of the presidency. He
opened letters and even arranged appointments with members of the cabinet
himself. In doing this, he’d overstretched himself, and Nixon was determined
not to make the same mistakes.

Nixon, therefore, turned to H. R. Haldeman to act as chief of staff. The role
had existed before, but Haldeman shaped its modern form. Haldeman used his
powers to organize procedures for White House staff.

For starters, he put a stop to the process of *end running* – gaining access to
the president through lesser members of the administration. Those wanting to
meet the president now had to go through the chief of staff first. This would
keep the president focused on his main policy aims. Haldeman’s command over the
administration meant he was the first person Nixon spoke to each morning and
the last person each night.

It was also Haldeman’s responsibility to keep Nixon on the straight and narrow.

He wasn’t always successful though. The tape recorders that Nixon had installed
to document Oval Office conversations provided evidence that Nixon wanted to
illegally break into the Brookings Institute. He suspected that documents
leaked to the media from the State Department were stored there.

On that occasion, Haldeman managed to restrain Nixon from authorizing the raid,
but he couldn’t always keep his increasingly neurotic president in check.

The paranoia surrounding the White House led to the Watergate scandal, which
involved forced entry and the planting of surveillance devices at the
Democratic National Committee offices. Ironically, Nixon was caught on his own
devices approving the payment for those who had broken in. His downfall soon
followed.

Even though Haldeman wasn’t ultimately successful, the paradigm for the White
House’s organizational staff system had been set.

## After Nixon’s resignation, Donald Rumsfeld became chief of staff for the new president, Gerald Ford.

The release of the incriminating White House tapes resulted in Nixon resigning
on 9 August 1974. It was either that or impeachment.

Nixon's Vice President Gerald Ford assumed the office. He’d need a strong chief
of staff to prevent the same mistakes from occurring.

But it was a shaky start. Ford’s approval rating plummeted when he decided to
issue Nixon with a free and absolute pardon to stop any possible indictment.

To stem the tide, Ford turned to Donald Rumsfeld to act as chief of staff.
Rumsfeld had a reputation for no-nonsense discipline. His career in Congress
demonstrated that he knew how to run a ruthlessly organized machine. He was the
man for the job.

However, Rumsfeld had three conditions. He wanted absolute authority over the
president’s schedule. He also demanded that he act as top adviser in all
decision-making and that he would take a cabinet position as soon as one was
free.

Ford agreed. Rumsfeld would put the White House back in order.

As part of his plan, Rumsfeld decided to delegate many tasks to his young
deputy, Dick Cheney. They kept close to Haldeman’s playbook: schedules were
tight, agendas meticulous, and the president was only given information
relevant to the situation.

However, they couldn’t stop Ford from making public gaffes. Most memorably, in
a 1976 presidential debate against Jimmy Carter, Ford claimed that there was no
Soviet domination of Eastern Europe.

At one point in 1975, Ford found himself 33 points adrift from Carter in the
polls. Rumsfeld saw that the writing was on the wall.

Consequently, Rumsfeld and Cheney sent a memo to the president, expressing
their doubts and relating the changes that were needed to reverse his fortunes.
Ford heeded their advice – his response was brutal. The *Halloween Massacre*
saw a massive staff reorganization. Rumsfeld became defense secretary, and
Cheney the new chief of staff.

It was no good. Although Ford managed to claw some points back, a difference of
just 9,000 votes in Ohio and Hawaii meant that Carter would be the next
president.

*“I think if we’d had another week, we might have pulled it off.” – Dick Cheney.*

## Jimmy Carter’s presidency was marred by him acting as his own chief of staff.

Carter’s successful presidential campaign team was led by Jack Watson – a
Harvard Law graduate and Washington insider – together with Hamilton Jordan, a
political strategist who’d been Carter’s primary advisor when he was governor
of Georgia.

After Carter took office, in 1977, Jordan was moved into Cheney’s old office
but he wasn’t given the actual title of chief of staff until 1979. In reality,
Carter took on many of the chief of staff’s responsibilities himself. He didn’t
want just one person setting his agenda, but he liked the idea of being able to
consult a larger team of talented individuals who would advise him equally.

Needless to say, Carter soon found himself overwhelmed. And it just got worse.
Events intervened. The Shah of Iran, a US ally, was deposed in the Iranian
Revolution of 1979. Consequently, oil prices shot up by 50 percent. And then,
to top it off, 66 hostages were taken at the American embassy in Tehran. The
stand off lasted for 444 days.

Crisis upon crisis piled up for the president. And it wasn’t much better for
Jordan. His marriage was falling apart in the face of numerous tabloid scandals
detailing his personal life. It was clear he could no longer carry out his
professional duties.

When Carter's approval ratings hit a new low of 34 percent, he finally buckled.
Just four months before the 1980 presidential election, Carter finally formally
appointed Watson as his chief of staff.

Watson managed to get the White House functioning. In fact, he is still
remembered as one of the most competent holders of the post. But it was too
little, too late. Carter lost in a landslide to Ronald Reagan.

Twenty minutes after Reagan was inaugurated, the 66 American hostages were
released due to Carter’s efforts.

## Ronald Reagan went through four chiefs of staff in his two terms.

Ronald Reagan became president in early 1981. He'd used his acting and oratory
skills to win the presidency, but when it came to actual policy implementation,
he found himself in need of support.

Consequently, Reagan appointed James Baker as chief of staff. He was a
pragmatist who knew Capitol Hill inside out, and he essentially acted as
Reagan’s co-president.

Baker was primarily tasked with pushing through the roster of policies later
known as *Reaganomics*. These were massive tax and spending cuts, but there was
fierce opposition to them in Congress. An attempt on Reagan’s life gave the
president a bump in the polls, and this provided Baker the space he needed. He
rode the wave of sympathy and pushed Reagan’s agenda through Congress.

However, the $750 billion cut to the economy triggered a recession.

Baker found himself having to convince a stubborn Reagan to raise taxes.
Thankfully, through Baker’s efforts, the most anti-tax president of modern
American history was convinced to row back, and the economy slowly recovered.

By the time Reagan was re-elected in 1984, Baker was exhausted. He hatched a
plan to switch jobs with Secretary of the Treasury Don Regan. To their mutual
surprise, Reagan accepted. But it was a mistake – Don Regan didn’t have Baker’s
political tact.

Infamously, in 1985, Dan Regan suggested to the president that the country
covertly sell weapons to Iran, which was under a trade embargo.

When news got out, Dan Regan resigned as chief of staff, but the damage had
been done. President Reagan later even admitted that Baker would never have
countenanced the idea under his watch.

Regan was replaced by former Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker, who succeeded
in convincing a reluctant Reagan to apologize to the country for what had
become known as the Iran Contra Scandal. Baker was successful but left soon
after to support his wife through cancer treatment.

He was replaced by his deputy, Kenneth Duberstein, who remained in the role
until the end of Reagan’s presidency. Duberstein’s talents ensured that Reagan
had a foreign policy legacy. He convinced the president – contrary to the
advice of his other advisors – to make his famous 1989 “tear down this wall”
speech in West Berlin. To this day, Reagan is thought by many to have helped
end the Cold War.

## George H. W. Bush’s chief-of-staff woes contributed to him becoming a one-term president.

Reagan was succeeded in the presidency by his former Vice President George H.
W. Bush in 1989. Bush appointed John Sununu as his chief of staff. Sununu was
well connected on Capitol Hill and impressively confident. He seemed to have
the right air about him. Sununu's qualities initially helped Bush to a series
of early policy victories including environmental regulation.

However, these early successes disguised a deeper problem. Sununu’s confidence
was revealed to be little more than arrogance, and he ended up alienating his
staff. Consequently, friends were in short supply when trouble struck.

In the middle of Bush’s re-election effort, the media revealed that Sununu had
been using military aircraft for personal trips. Even though then-Secretary of
Defense Cheney had consistently warned against it, Sununu persisted. His 27
trips cost taxpayers $615,000. Sununu had to go.

Bush then appointed Samuel Skinner, his secretary for transportation, as the
next chief of staff. Skinner was the polar opposite of Sununu. He was reserved
rather than arrogant. But this, too, was a liability. His demeanor meant that
he just couldn’t rally the staff. What’s more, as Bush’s re-election effort
faltered, Skinner became more and more overwhelmed. He later described his time
as chief of staff as "the worst job in the world.”

A late minute change of fortune was needed. In his hour of need, Bush turned to
his old friend and Reagan’s first chief of staff, James Baker. Baker
unquestionably had the experience and leadership skills, but there were fewer
than three months to go before the election. Baker couldn’t work a miracle: it
was simply too little, too late.

In the face of a tanking economy and Bill Clinton’s charisma, Bush was doomed
to be a one-term president.

## Bill Clinton’s turbulent two-term presidency saw four chiefs of staff.

Clinton began his presidency by making the same mistake as Jimmy Carter. He
also tried to be his own chief of staff.

Technically he had one – Mack McLarty. But as Clinton’s childhood friend
McLarty just couldn’t refuse his president. The result was absolute chaos.

During the administration’s first few months, the Oval Office resembled a dorm
room. Staffers sprawled on couches and donut boxes blanketed the floor.

The disorder was keeping Clinton from achieving his policy goals. A new chief
of staff was needed: Leon Panetta, then director of the Office of Management
and Budget.

But he had some conditions. Firstly, Panetta demanded he be given absolute
authority to reorganize the White House. Secondly, he only wanted to be there
for two years. Once installed, Panetta was quick to act. The dorm room Oval
Office days were over.

But the damage had been done. The White House was seen as ineffective, and
healthcare and tax reforms went nowhere. The Republicans demolished the
Democrats in the 1994 midterms and gained control of Congress for the first
time in 40 years.

It looked like Clinton was set to be a one-term president. Nonetheless, Panetta
kept pressing on. He was even able to rebrand the president as a charismatic,
organized and unifying leader. Panetta’s efforts were helped by a government
shutdown blamed on the Republicans, as well as Clinton’s response to the 1995
Oklahoma City bombing, a far-right terror attack which killed 168 people.

Clinton’s approval ratings rose rapidly, and the economy did too. Clinton was
re-elected in 1996.

Panetta’s deputy Erskine Bowles replaced him just before the Lewinsky scandal
broke. Bowles was upset that Clinton had lied to both him and the country about
his affair with a White House intern, and gave up his post. His own deputy,
John Podesta, took over in 1998.

As chief of staff, Podesta helped Clinton – and later Barack Obama – to use, as
they saw it, executive powers for good. In spite of Republican control of
Congress, Clinton was able to create new national parks and issued 177
presidential pardons.

## During George W. Bush’s presidency, the vice president effectively acted as chief of staff.

George W. Bush became president in 2001. He chose Andy Card, who’d been a
former adviser to Bush senior, as his chief of staff. However, the real power
in the White House lay with Vice President Cheney, himself a chief of staff
under Ford.

Card found himself organizing day-to-day administration, but it was Cheney who
really set the president’s agenda, especially on national security issues.

A case in point: Card was the one who famously whispered into Bush’s ear on
9/11 that the United States was under attack. But it was Cheney – along with
his old mentor and now Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld – who pushed the War on
Terror.

After 9/11, Cheney was a changed man. Previously, he’d been calm and
level-headed. Now he set about dramatically expanding surveillance operations
and even approved torture, including waterboarding, at the Guantanamo Bay
detention camp.

Cheney and Rumsfeld pushed Bush into launching the Iraq War in 2003. They
didn’t care that the evidence for Iraq’s supposed weapons of mass destruction
was shaky. Dissenting voices from both within and without the administration
were ignored. Even the opposition of Reagan’s chief of staff James Baker
counted for nothing.

The White House was divided on national security policy and advocating an
increasingly unpopular war. Card had had enough and wanted out. He tendered his
resignation to Bush in 2006 and was replaced by Joshua Bolten, Bush’s director
of the Office of Management and Budget.

Bolten managed to bring a little more order to the White House. What’s more, he
even convinced Bush – against Cheney’s wishes – to get rid of Rumsfeld.
Mistakes in Iraq were mounting, and Rumsfeld was seen as responsible for the
insurgency caused by the decision to disband the Iraqi military.

Bolten was also there to calmly steer Bush through the 2008 financial crisis.
Notably, he convinced the president to buy $700 billion in toxic assets from
major financial institutions, which warded off immediate disaster.

## Barack Obama was determined to learn from history but met with mixed success.

On the eve of Barack Obama's election victory, he and his advisers started
looking for a suitable chief of staff. They needed someone who both knew
Washington and wouldn’t be afraid to hassle Obama, especially given that
legislation dealing with the 2008 financial crisis needed to be passed
urgently.

However, Obama had been elected on a platform of change. His choice of insider
Rahm Emanuel was bound to cause friction.

Obama’s ambitious attempt at healthcare reforms was the first issue to fall by
the wayside.

Emanuel persistently sought to dilute the president’s plans, counting on
bipartisan support. But he disillusioned even the Democrats, especially after
heavy losses in the 2010 midterms. He kept pushing Obama to a more centrist
position and away from his progressive campaign values.

When, in 2010, Emanuel's dream job – mayor of Chicago – came up, he saw a fresh
opportunity and resigned.

Obama ended up choosing Clinton’s old Secretary of Commerce William Daley as
his next chief of staff. The idea was to repair ties with the business world,
as it was thought Daley would temper Obama's anti-Wall Street image.

But it was a false step. Daley’s CEO management style wasn’t suited to Obama’s
more liberal senior advisers. Valerie Jarrett, for one, couldn’t bear him.

After a year, Daley was replaced by Jack Lew, director of the Office of
Management and Budget. But he didn’t last long either. His ambitions were
directed toward the Treasury. After Obama’s 2012 re-election, Lew got his wish.

Denis McDonough took the reins for Obama’s second term. He’d previously been
deputy national security adviser. It was a tough job. Congress was now
Republican-controlled; progress on domestic issues like gun control or
immigration was impossible.

All that could be done was to issue a series of executive orders to secure
Obama’s legacy. McDonough and Clinton’s last chief of staff, John Podesta, were
on hand to assist Obama in the monumental tasks of restoring good relations
with Cuba, negotiating a nuclear deal with Iran and signing the Paris climate
accord.

Congress was unwilling, but the gatekeepers were there, ready and able, to work
for their president.

## Suggested further reading:The American Presidency by Charles O. Jones

*The American Presidency *(2007) offers an introduction to the US presidency
and the unique role each president must play in world politics. Find out what
kind of thinking went into the creation of this job and how it has changed over
the years. America’s Founding Fathers created a uniquely experimental
government when they broke free from British influence; even today, their
experiment continues to surprise us.