# Think Like a Rocket Scientist

*by Ozan Varol*

Source:
[https://www.blinkist.com/books/think-like-a-rocket-scientist-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/think-like-a-rocket-scientist-en)

![Think Like a Rocket
Scientist](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5f76e2226cee07000602f183/1_1/470.jpg)

(2020) reveals the strategies that rocket scientists use to innovate,
problem-solve, and bring the unimaginable into fruition. By learning the
techniques that scientists use every day, you’ll gain powerful tools that will
help you fulfill both your professional and personal dreams.

# What’s in it for me? Learn powerful scientific strategies to help make your dreams a reality.

Have you lowered the bar on what you think you can achieve? Or worse, have you
resigned yourself to mediocrity? Perhaps you’re frustrated that you can’t come
up with a solution that’d propel your business to a new level. Or maybe you’ve
told yourself that your aspiration is really just a pipe dream. And why
wouldn’t you? Isn’t success exclusively for the elite geniuses of the world, or
people with enough money to follow their hearts? 

The truth is, everyone is capable of achieving a breakthrough, whether it’s
that brilliant idea for a new product, scoring that promotion, or even learning
a new skill. What differentiates those who make this happen from those who
don’t isn’t necessarily intelligence or money, it’s mindset. Once you change
how you approach problems and challenges, you can make giant leaps in all areas
of your life. And to make that change, you need to learn how to think like a
rocket scientist. 

In these blinks, you’ll learn
- the secret ingredient to being original;
- why you should be bored more often; and
- what astronauts and comedians have in common.

# Changing your attitude towards uncertainty opens you up to discovery.

The engineers and scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory have a strange
tradition. At crucial moments in every space mission, they chomp on peanuts.
This phenomenon began when a Ranger spacecraft successfully launched after a
long run of failures. An engineer had brought a bag of peanuts into mission
control that day. Since then, peanuts are eaten at every launch to ward off bad
luck.

This shows that even the most scientific among us fear uncertainty. That’s why
we engage in strange rituals – like eating peanuts or wearing our lucky jeans –
to regain a sense of control. We can’t help feeling this way. Fear of the
unknown helped keep our ancestors safe from saber-toothed tigers. But when we
avoid uncertainty altogether, we close ourselves off to new possibilities.

Scientists don’t see uncertainty as something to fear. When faced with a dark,
shadow-filled room, they don’t turn away like most of us. They poke around in
it until they find a light switch. Once that light’s on, they can evaluate what
they’ve found. There might be something curious in the room, or there may be
another door leading to yet another mystery.

Uncertainty doesn’t make scientists panic. It invigorates them. Instead of
worrying about the monsters that might be lurking in corners, they focus on all
the amazing things awaiting discovery.

There are some practical steps you can take to get excited about the unknown,
instead of letting it inhibit you. Start by asking yourself what the worst
possible outcome would be. Next, consider how likely it is for that outcome to
occur. Writing down these thoughts puts them in perspective, since tragedy
rarely strikes. More often than not, you’ll see that the things you value most
will still be intact, even if the worst scenario plays out. Acknowledging this
disarms your fears about venturing down a new path. Once you’ve faced your
fears, you’ll be free to set off on your journey and see what you can achieve. 

# The best way to innovate is to stop conforming.

Tech entrepreneur Elon Musk had a problem – a $20 million one. He wanted to
launch a space company to pursue his dream of settling Mars. But he couldn’t
afford a single rocket. The aerospace companies building them all outsourced
work to subcontractors, who outsourced work further. All those margins added to
an already expensive item, making it unobtainable.

Musk was about to give up when he had a revelation. He asked himself what you
needed to go to space. The answer, of course, was a rocket. And what makes a
rocket? Raw materials. After some number crunching, Musk found that those
materials cost just 2 percent of the average price of a rocket. And if Musk did
the bulk of manufacturing in-house, he’d have far greater control over quality
and budget. By striking out on his own, Musk could start working towards his
dream.

Life is filled with routines and rituals that we follow without question. We
get up at the same time, take the same route to work, eat the same thing for
lunch each day. This serves a useful purpose; we simply don’t have the time or
headspace to analyze every decision we make. But when we blindly follow
outdated routines, we end up privileging process over outcome. Instead of
questioning if there’s a better way to do something, we get trapped in habits
that hinder original ideas.

You can break free of constraining routines by embracing your inner rocket
scientist. Rocket scientists use **first principles thinking**. This method
asks you to systematically question every possible aspect of a situation, until
you arrive at an indisputable truth. For instance, that you need raw materials
to build a rocket. During this exercise, let go of all assumptions about what’s
been done in the past. This will move you beyond established boundaries, like
believing only government-funded space agencies can afford rockets. That way,
you enter the realm of innovative thinking. 

To identify which processes to challenge with first principles thinking,
reflect on **why** you do something the way you do it. When justifying your
response, make sure your explanation relates to your current circumstances –
not the past. Just like Musk, you may find that by forging your own path, you
can achieve that ambitious goal. 

# Productivity is the enemy of original thought.

When he was 16, Albert Einstein mused over what would happen if he could
observe light by running as fast as it. He knew this was beyond the scope of
his body. But imagining this scenario lay the foundations for what became the
special theory of relativity, a decade later.

Nikola Tesla also used his imagination as his laboratory. He devoted hours to
planning out his inventions mentally, before sketching them. His mind was the
first testing ground for his alternating-current system, which we benefit from
every day. Neither he nor Einstein would have achieved their incredible
breakthroughs if their lives had been cluttered with busyness.

Creativity needs time and space. That’s why so many modern workplaces are so
uncreative. Most of us are trapped in a cycle of self-propagating work. Every
email we send results in another email, which we feel compelled to answer
immediately. We’re under so much pressure to get results and deliver that
there’s little scope for curiosity and exploration. Before we know it, we’ve
forgotten that we were once children who loved discovery, who kept asking
questions about the world.

But that childlike sense of wonder and openness is essential if you want to
find innovative solutions for problems. Luckily, it’s not hard to reconnect
with your inner seven-year-old. All you need to do is run a **thought
experiment.**

Thought experiments offer us the space to consider a specific question in a
parallel world where reality works differently. This frees you from limitations
like skills, access to resources, or even – like in Einstein’s case – physical
reality. The point isn’t necessarily to hit on the right answer, but to gain
insight by forcing yourself out of stale thinking patterns. 

Adding unoccupied time into your schedule encourages thought experiments. When
your mind is given permission to drift, the areas of your brain responsible for
creativity come to life. This is why many authors, like J. K. Rowling, champion
boredom. In 1990, before smartphones were invented, Rowling’s train from
Manchester to London was delayed by four hours. The story of Harry Potter
emerged in her mind while she was stuck at the station with nothing to do.
Imagine what your mind might gift you, if you allowed it time to wander. 

> Hustle and creativity are antithetical to each other. You can’t generate
> breakthroughs while clearing out your inbox.

# Your mind is the biggest obstacle between you and your goal.

You’re probably familiar with the story of Icarus, who tried to escape
imprisonment on Crete by using wings made of wax. Despite his father’s
warnings, Icarus flew too high. The sun melted his wings and Icarus plunged to
his death.

Through warnings and stories like this, society teaches you to fear taking
risks. This keeps you safe when you’re young, but it holds you back as an
adult. You tell yourself you don’t have what it takes to go for that promotion,
or ask your crush out on a date. But if you change the story you’re telling
yourself, you can finally soar.

Many of us think that success belongs to the elite, not average people, so we
don’t bother trying. This attitude demonstrates a point author David Schwartz
makes in his book **The Magic of Thinking Big**. The main obstacle stopping you
from achieving your goals isn’t your bank balance or lack of time – it’s your
mind.

To combat thoughts that discourage you from chasing your dreams, practice
**divergent thinking**.

Divergent thinking is a method used to stimulate creativity by generating ideas
without limitation or restriction. In divergent thinking **every **idea is
welcome, irrespective of real-world restraints like budget. Every idea is
embraced as a possibility. The aim is to come up with as many ideas as
possible, not hit upon a perfect solution. This ensures you don’t dismiss any
concepts prematurely.

To practice divergent thinking, banish that rational voice in your head. That
way, your mind is free to enter the realm of creativity and innovation. Here,
you can explore what you **could **do, rather than what you think you
**should** do. Once you’ve finished generating possibilities, you can welcome
back your rational self, to evaluate your ideas.

If your mind falls back on old or pedestrian ideas, push it outside the box.
Ask yourself what solution you’d reach in a science fiction world. This isn’t
as absurd as you might think. In its early days, aerospace manufacturer Blue
Origin hired science fiction author Neal Stephenson to help imagine ways to get
to space without using a rocket. Stephenson may not have been a rocket
scientist, but his creativity inspired innovative designs.

# To get the best solution, you must ask the right question.

In 1999, Ozan Varol received some terrible news from NASA. The three-legged
landing system he intended to use to set down a rover on Mars had just failed
spectacularly on another mission. Varol immediately snapped into action. The
question on his mind was: How do we fix the existing system?

But engineer Mark Adler saw things differently. He asked the question: how do
we defy gravity so that the rover reaches Mars safely? To answer this question,
Adler abandoned the three-legged system completely. Instead, he designed a
system of enormous airbags that would inflate around the rover, letting it
bounce a few dozen times before coming to a halt on the Martian surface.
Eventually, Adler’s design safely delivered two rovers to Mars.

When it comes to solving problems, many of us act just like Varol did – fixated
on delivering an answer without fully considering the question. And as soon as
we’re emotionally invested in a particular solution, we stubbornly defend it.
We never reflect on whether there might be a better approach. But if we change
the question we’re asking, like Adler did, we can often come up with a
revolutionary answer.

So how do you ask better questions?

First, learn to differentiate between a **strategy **and a **tactic**. A
strategy is the plan you use to achieve a particular outcome, like landing a
rover on Mars. Tactics, on the other hand, are actions that implement that
strategy. One tactic is using a three-legged landing system. Another is
surrounding your rover in airbags.

It’s easy to confuse tactics with strategies. That is what happened to Varol.
If you’re having difficulty identifying your strategy, take a step back and ask
yourself what problem you’re trying to solve. Are you trying to fix a broken
landing system, or trying to explore the Red Planet? By focusing on the bigger
picture, you’ll identify the question you should be asking. Then, you can start
generating ideas – or tactics – as potential solutions to that question. And
only at the end, you assess your ideas for quality.

> The next time you’re tempted to engage in problem solving, try problem
> finding instead.

# To arrive at the truth, you must actively overcome your blind spots.

“What aren’t we seeing?” If the navigators of NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter had
asked this question in 1999, they may have avoided a $193 million mistake. Two
months before the orbiter’s scheduled arrival date, data projected that it
would orbit Mars 100 kilometers lower than it should. This meant certain
failure. The orbiter would either burn to a crisp or bounce off Mars’s
atmosphere and into the depths of space.

But the navigators put the data discrepancy down to an error in the navigation
system. They were wrong. On its arrival date, the orbiter passed behind Mars as
planned, but was never heard of again. Later, an investigation found that the
error had occurred because the system had been designed by a British company
who used the inch-pound measurements. The navigators used metric. All of their
measurements were off by a factor of four. If they’d questioned the data
instead of ignoring it, they may have prevented the costly disaster.

Even in the face of hard data, our brains look for information that affirms our
views and ignores anything that doesn’t. This is called **confirmation bias**
and none of us are immune to it. In fact, hearing views that oppose our own is
so distressing that we’ll avoid it at all costs, even when the stakes are high.

So how can you overcome your built-in tendency to only see what you want to
see?

First, avoid becoming overly attached to your opinions. Instead, think of each
opinion as a **working hypothesis**. This reframes your belief into a theory
that can be proven, disproven, or even abandoned. That way, you remain
objective. Even better, generate a number of differing hypotheses, so you don’t
get stuck on one conclusion.

Proposing conflicting hypotheses is an excellent way to help eliminate your
blind spots. Create these hypotheses by asking yourself what’s missing. If the
navigators had done this, they may well have unearthed the issue with the units
of measurement. It could have saved the mission.

Finally, work to disprove your hypotheses, rather than prove them. Do this by
presenting your opinions to yourself, as though they belong to someone else.
Find every hole in every argument and pick it to pieces. Remember that each
hypothesis you disprove brings you one step closer to the truth.

# The best way to ensure success is to test rigorously.

Astronauts train for years before they go to space. They spend hours practicing
procedures in the Neutral Buoyancy Lab, an enormous pool that houses a
submerged replica of the International Space Station. They even experience
weightlessness in an airplane dubbed the “vomit comet,” which replicates zero
gravity by diving like a rollercoaster.

But the most grueling training exercises are the simulated emergencies that
take astronauts to their physical limits. In space, one wrong move could turn a
situation like this fatal. So, the training program tries to trick them into
making a mistake. That way, the astronaut is better prepared for their mission.

Typically, we use tests to confirm our beliefs, not challenge them. If we get
poor results, we find a reason to justify them, like unfavorable conditions or
bad weather. Instead, we should question how well we’ve designed that test.
Because the true purpose of a test is to find the breaking point where things
go wrong.

Not many of us train in the environment that we’ll be tested in, so we may not
identify that breaking point until it’s too late. We practice our big speech in
the comfort of our home, not in a cavernous space under glaring lights. We ask
a good-natured friend to run a mock job interview with us, while we wear
sweatpants instead of a stiff suit. This makes us more likely to fail on the
big day.

Unless you’re heading for space, you can safely train in an environment that
mimics your upcoming challenge. Comedian Jerry Seinfeld does this by trying out
his jokes in small comedy clubs. Based on audience responses, he can tweak
material or even cut it completely. This way, he is better prepared for
important gigs.

When testing, it’s important to ensure that each component is trialed
individually. Finally, the whole system is tested, too. Don’t make the mistake
of assuming that something will work just because each part of it works well in
isolation. After all, a medication that’s effective by itself can prove lethal
when mixed with another drug. Test as thoroughly as possible, and push yourself
– or your product – to the limit. This will give you confidence in your ability
to handle whatever comes your way.

# We must carefully study our failures, even in the midst of success.

Failure is inevitable when you’re aiming high. If you’re on the hunt for an
original solution, you’ll be generating lots of ideas. Many of those ideas
won’t meet the brief. But they play an important role by moving you closer to
that breakthrough concept. 

James Dyson clocked up 5,126 failed prototypes over 15 years. Only then did he
find the right design for his famous bagless vacuum. When we carefully study
our failures, as Dyson did, they provide us with powerful insight.

But it’s not enough to dissect past failures. We should be skeptical of our
successes, too.

The root of many tragedies can be traced back to past successes. This was the
case with the catastrophic **Challenger **space mission in 1986. Mechanical
engineer Roger Boisjoly had repeatedly raised concerns about the space
shuttle’s O-rings. These thin rubber bands prevent hot gases from leaking out
of the joints in rocket boosters. 

But in previous missions, damaged O-rings still managed to work. So Boisjoly’s
concerns were dismissed as an acceptable risk.

On January 28, 1986, the **Challenger **successfully launched. But one minute
into its flight, the space shuttle disintegrated, killing seven astronauts. A
special commission found that the O-rings were the cause. Because flying with
damaged O-rings had become standard practice, NASA considered it the norm
instead of a serious consideration.

Confidence that arises from past successes can blind you to reality. You think
you know what you’re doing because you’ve done it before. But just because you
succeeded doesn’t mean you didn’t make mistakes. Those mistakes might not have
led to failure in the past, but they could lead to dire consequences in the
future. 

Even when we think we’ve succeeded, we must find and learn from our failures.
Otherwise, we’ll never gain the knowledge that our experiences offer us. This
is why it’s crucial to remember that success isn’t an ending in itself. It’s a
milestone on an endless journey of discovery.

# Final summary

Thinking like a rocket scientist means adopting a new mindset, one where
uncertainty is embraced as a new frontier leading to endless discovery. 

It’s within this frontier that you can arrive at original thoughts and
groundbreaking innovations. 

But this can only happen if you’re willing to confront your blind spots and
break away from processes and opinions that limit your creativity. 

Once you’ve reconnected with your childlike curiosity and openness, you’ll
advance towards your goals at an accelerated pace, and live an extraordinary
life.

## Actionable advice: 

**Take your question for a walk.**

Next time you’re feeling stuck while trying to solve a difficult problem, put
on your sneakers and go for a walk. Walking puts you in the ideal mindset for
innovation, because it relaxes you while allowing the cogs of your subconscious
to turn. Walking led to important breakthroughs for scientists like Darwin,
Tesla, and Heisenberg. So, next time you need to come up with an original
solution, follow in their footsteps and take a good, long stroll. 

## What to read next: Loonshots, by Safi Bahcall

Now you’re thinking like a rocket scientist, you’ll be brimming with brilliant
innovations that could take your business to a whole new level. But that
doesn’t mean you’ll get the green light to go ahead. Innovation relies on
experimentation, which is expensive and risky. So how do you create an
environment that mitigates business risks while fostering seemingly outlandish
ideas – ones that might end up changing the world? Find out how to navigate
this complex terrain by checking out the blinks to **Loonshots**, by Safi
Bahcall. 
