# The 5 Love Languages

*by Gary Chapman*

Source: [https://www.blinkist.com/books/the-5-love-languages-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/the-5-love-languages-en)

![The 5 Love Languages](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/56786ba60bac9b0007000029/3_4/470.jpg)

(2015) is a contemporary guide to developing a relationships of lifelong love
that can easily overcome the hurdles that modern couples face. These blinks
detail the five ways people give and feel love, and how any couple can use this
knowledge to make their relationship more nurturing, affectionate and
compassionate.

## Final summary

The key message in this book:

Many of the problems married couples face today are simply a result of feeling and expressing love in different ways. Learning the different love languages will improve communication in your relationship, thus boosting the emotional well-being of both you and your partner.

## From https://www.sheknows.com/health-and-wellness/articles/1059295/what-are-the-5-love-languages/

### Words of affirmation

According to Chapman, people with this love language need to hear their partner
say, “I love you.” Even better is including the reasons behind the love through
leaving them a voice message or a written note or talking to them directly with
sincere words of kindness and affirmation.

Other examples from Tessina include saying things like: “Thank you,” “That was
nice of you” and/or “I appreciate what you did.”

### Quality time

This language, says Chapman, is all about giving your partner your undivided
attention. That means no TV, no chores, no cell phone — just giving each other
your undivided attention. Take time every day to do this.

“Spending time with your partner is about being together, paying attention to
each other, sharing something meaningful together and listening and
communicating,” adds Tessina. Other examples include preparing dinner together
and talking while preparing and eating it, sharing plans for the future, making
love and/or creating something together.

### Receiving gifts

The person who loves this language thrives on the love, thoughtfulness and
effort behind the gift. In short, actions speak louder than words.

“The thing that works best is picking the right gift that shows you understand
your partner and the effort you made to express love,” says Chapman. “Think
about finding a gift that your partner has been asking for or would enjoy
receiving and plan for a special way of giving it; make it a surprise.”

The act of giving a gift tells your partner you cared enough to think about him
or her in advance and go out of your way to get something to make your partner
smile, says Tessina.

### Acts of service

This language includes anything you do to ease the burden of responsibility,
like vacuuming the floors, going grocery shopping or sending thank-you notes.
Stumped as to what your partner needs? Chapman suggests asking your partner to
give ideas for things they’d like you to do that would make their life easier
and make a schedule to get them done.

Simple things like making breakfast in bed or walking the dog demonstrate you
care about your partner and your life together, says Tessina. “It says you want
to make your home and relationship more livable and you want to ease your
partner’s burden,” she adds.

### Physical touch

People who speak this love language thrive on any type of physical touch:
hand-holding, hugs and pats on the back. “Be intentional about finding ways to
express your love using physical touch: giving hugs, touching their arm or hand
during a conversation; offer to give a neck or back rub,” says Chapman.

According to Tessina, physical touch is the most direct way to communicate
love. “As long as it’s done in an atmosphere which is loving and not
oppressive, physical touch can be the most effective of the love languages. It
calms, heals and reassures,” she explains.

The bottom line is that not everyone expresses their love in the same way, so
being aware of the different love languages can help you understand your
relationship better.

## Actionable advice:

**Help your partner through hard times with the greatest gift of all.**

What’s the best present you could give your partner? To give you a hint, it’s
not diamonds, flowers or a new car. It’s the **gift of self** – which simply
means standing by your partner, especially during rough periods. So, simply
being there during those difficult times – like pregnancy or a career upheaval
– is absolutely key. You’ll be surprised what an impact you can make by
committing to being present when the going gets tough.

## What’s in it for me? Bring renewed attention to how you communicate with your partner.

English, Mandarin, Swahili, Quechua: the world is full of languages, and most
of us don’t understand a single word if a person talks to us in a language we
don’t speak. In fact, trying to communicate without a shared language is
fertile ground for misunderstanding, conflict and resentment. Luckily, however,
most of us speak the same language as our partner. Or do we?

Actually, in a sense, we really don’t. There are different languages or ways to
express love, and understanding your own and your partner’s primary way of
communicating is a crucial part of any good relationship or marriage. In these
blinks you will learn about the human need for love, the way love is
communicated between people and how to identify the love language you speak.

In these blinks, you’ll discover
- how Mark’s and Andrea’s marriage was lost in translation;
- why being in love only lasts for two years; and
- how a bad Christmas gift can influence communications with your partner. 

## Love is a human need that’s defined by your emotional well-being.

If there’s one word in the English language that’s both absolutely essential
and totally confusing it’s the word “love.” But despite its countless meanings,
philosophers and religious thinkers alike agree that love is essential to a
full and fulfilling life. 

So how should you think about love?

Well, first of all it’s important not to get confused by the word’s many
definitions. Instead you should concentrate on the type of love that’s key to
**your** emotional health. So, while we use the word in countless ways – in
reference to objects like ice cream, cars or jewelry; to describe our feelings
about activities like jogging, hiking and dancing; and when talking about
emotional connections to parents or partners – we also use it to pin down a
romantic feeling. 

And the easiest way to define what love means to **you** is to take a look at
the sources of your emotional fulfillment. That’s because the need to be loved
and appreciated is rooted deep in human nature. For instance, child
psychologists have shown that all children have emotional needs that, if left
unmet, can result in emotional instability. 

The most important ones?

Love and affection.

So, love is clearly important and you need a way to measure it. One way to
gauge whether your emotional needs are being met is to pay attention to your
**love tank**. Just as a car can’t drive without gas, you can’t function
without love, and if your need for love and affection isn’t adequately met
you’ll end up with an empty tank. Keeping your love tank full is an essential
component of a healthy marriage. All solid marriages require fuel.

For example, the author has a client who thinks that financial gain and
material possessions can’t compensate for an empty love tank. The way he sees
it, a fancy house, expensive cars and a beach house don’t mean anything if your
wife doesn’t love you.

## Relationships change as the joy of falling in love fades; communication is the only solution.

You might have noticed that there’s always some new expert or book claiming to
know the secret to long-lasting marriage. Yet plenty of couples still struggle
to keep their love afloat after the honeymoon period, when the euphoria of
falling in love starts to wane. It makes you wonder how being in love affects
us, doesn’t it?

Well, being in love makes us view the world through rose-tinted glasses. Here’s
how:

The first phase of attraction, the thing that gets relationships started, is
marked by what’s called the **in-love phenomenon**. It’s the obsessive,
instinctual part of love that’s closest to our animal instinct to reproduce and
perpetuate the species. This initial phase clouds our judgment. 

And it’s also been closely studied. For instance, psychologist Dorothy Tennov
conducted an in-depth analysis of the in-love phenomenon, and, after studying
hundreds of couples, she found that the average lifespan of most relationships
that centered around romance was just two years!

That’s because once the rapture of falling in love wears off reality starts to
set in. To survive this difficult transition it’s essential for every couple to
build an emotional atmosphere that lets them work through differences and
fulfill each other’s emotional needs. 

But how?

The first step in cultivating such a climate of **real love** in a marriage
that’s advancing beyond its initial stages is effective communication. Because
humans have emotional needs that the short-lived in-love experience can’t
accommodate. So, as this feeling fades, it’s essential for couples to work on
emotional communication that can sustain their relationship over the long haul.

Not just that, but real love is a choice that means adopting a different
attitude and a new way of thinking. It’s all about defining your expectations
for the marriage, and how you share them with and receive them from your
partner.

**“In fact, true love cannot begin until the in-love experience has run its
course.”**

## People feel and express love differently, and understanding your partner’s love language is key to a long-lasting relationship.

Most people know that language consists of more than mere words – there’s body
language, for instance, and tone of voice. Well, the language of love is
equally complex. That’s because different people perceive love in different
ways, and use different words and actions to express it. Essentially, we all
speak a different love language. 

So, just like being multilingual can be to your advantage, understanding the
different ways love is expressed will help you build a strong, happy
relationship. But this requires couples to devote the necessary time to
discovering the nuances of one another’s love language. It’ll be worth the
effort, though, because that’s the surest route to filling your partner’s love
tank – a tool that will help you and your partner excel while supporting your
relationship.

Misunderstandings arise even between partners that have known each other for
ages. Usually, this is because one partner has incorrectly translated the
other’s love language – an easy thing to do, considering that, though partners
tend to share a lot of common habits, they often feel and express love
differently. It’s uncommon for a person’s love language to correspond exactly
with that of their partner. 

For instance, Mark and Andrea used to disagree on everything except the fact
that they both loved their kids. Mark knew Andrea was a good mother, but didn’t
feel her giving him affection. On the other hand, Andrea knew Mark was a great
provider and caretaker for his family but complained that his 50-hour workweek
left no time for him to be with his family. 

The problem?

Mark’s primary language was physical touch and Andrea’s was quality time. 

As you can see, understanding your partner’s love language is essential. In the
following blinks, you’ll learn the grammars of all five love languages, and how
to identify which one your partner is speaking!

## Positive, uplifting words of affirmation are a powerful way to express love.

Have you heard of the Greek philosopher Xenophon, one of Socrates’s students?
Most people haven’t, but he said something that still rings true today:
**praise is the sweetest of all sounds**. Words of admiration, praise and
encouragement – nothing is sweeter. 

In fact, this is the idea behind the love language that’s called **words of
affirmation**. Here’s how to speak it:

Give verbal compliments. This is most effective when done in a simple and
straightforward manner; various encouraging, kind and humble words are all part
of the words-of-affirmation language. For instance, you might tell your partner
that they look great in a new outfit, praise their ability to care for your
children or tell them how much you appreciate their sense of humor. 

But if you want to broaden your vocabulary, you can keep a notebook in which
you write down various affirming words you come across, whether in newspapers
and magazines, on TV or in conversation with friends. 

Another important thing to keep in mind is that words of affirmation can
function beautifully as requests. However, when requests are heard as demands,
the potential for intimacy deflates and you risk scaring your partner off. So,
it’s important to make sure your words are interpreted as a request, meaning
you’re giving guidance, **not** an ultimatum. 

For example, one day a woman entered the author’s office complaining that her
husband hadn’t painted their bedroom even though she had been asking him to do
so for nine months!

The author’s advice?

He told her to stop mentioning the painting and start complimenting her husband
every time he did something that she liked. She was skeptical but followed the
author’s guidance and a mere three weeks later she told him it had worked. The
trick was learning that giving verbal compliments is a much better incentive
than making biting criticisms.

## Spend quality time with your partner.

The modern age is a time of incessant distraction and time is one of our most
valued commodities. As a result, too many couples get distracted from the heart
of romance – spending time together. This brings us to the second love
language: **quality time.**

The key to this language?

Undivided attention.

It’s not enough to simply be together in the same room. Quality time is about
focusing on your partner and nothing else, even if loads of distractions lurk
behind every corner. Furthermore, spending quality time with your partner is a
primary way for both of you to feel loved, respected and appreciated. 

But remember: lots of married couples think they’re spending time together when
they’re actually just spending time **near** each other. For instance, watching
a football game or staring at a computer while chatting with your partner is
**not** giving them the quality attention they need. 

So what exactly is quality time?

Either quality conversations or quality activities. You probably have a sense
of the former, so here’s what the latter is:

A quality activity is something that one or both people want to be doing; it’s
less about the event itself and more about the chance to express love for each
other. Not only that, but the more common activities you share, the more
memories you’ll have to look back on together in the future. These could be
anything from strolling in a park, gardening, seeing a show or even preparing a
meal together. 

For instance, Emily **loves** going to bookstores to scour the stacks for her
next great read. Her husband, Jeff, is not as enthusiastic about literature,
but shares this activity with Emily nonetheless. He even helps her find books
that she might enjoy. 

Emily’s end of the deal has been learning to identify when Jeff’s patience is
at the tipping point and she knows not to spend too long browsing. As a result,
Jeff happily pays for whatever books Emily ends up choosing.

## Gifts are visual symbols of love and surprising your partner with regular presents, regardless of their monetary value, is a great way to show affection.

Take a look at any culture, from the Mayans of long ago to the modern Eskimos
living in the northern tundra, and you’ll see that giving gifts is a part of
every marital process. Considering how central the giving of gifts is in all
marriages, it’s essential to understand the love language of **receiving
gifts**.

Here’s how it works:

If your partner’s main love language is receiving gifts, pretty much every gift
you give them will resonate as an expression of true love. That’s because gifts
are physical symbols of love that materially express the love one person has
for another. 

But what kind of gifts should you give?

It’s easy to find out what your partner likes by keeping track of all the
presents that brought them excitement or joy over the years, whether they were
from you or someone else. It can also be helpful to consult friends and family
for gift-giving advice. 

And remember: for people who speak the love language of receiving gifts,
monetary value is not the main focus. In fact, the value lies in the whole
process – from having the idea to give a gift, to going out to get or make it
and, finally, the gesture of presenting this symbol of love to your partner. 

For instance, Doug used to give gifts to his wife Kate; when they got married,
however, he stopped. This was a problem, since Kate’s essential love language
was receiving gifts. She quickly began feeling emotionally abandoned. The
author asked Doug why he had stopped and Doug said it just cost him too much
money. 

Luckily, the author explained that the monetary value of the presents is
insignificant and Doug began showering Kate with random gifts of affection.
This reversed Kate’s feelings of abandonment and gave Doug an easy way to
express his love.

## Doing useful things for your partner is a common way to express love.

Does your partner often wish you would clean up after dinner, take out the
trash or wash the car? If so, their primary love language might be **acts of
service**. But how can you attend to this language?

The best way is to intentionally do helpful things for your partner. These acts
of service are essentially things you know your partner would appreciate your
handling – things like vacuuming or paying the bills, for example, or maybe
grocery shopping, helping the kids with their schoolwork or taking the dog to
the vet. 

But just as you can’t demand love, you can’t demand acts of service from your
partner. Nor can they from you. To be truly legitimate, such acts need to be
voluntary. So, instead of asking what your partner can do for you, ask what
**you** can do for your partner. 

However, keep in mind that asking this question might require you to take a
look at, and maybe even adjust your views on, traditional gender roles. For
instance, running a home and caring for children is not necessarily a task for
women; learning about acts of service requires you to decide for yourself what
your responsibilities are, regardless of stereotypes. 

Just consider Mark, who was raised in a family with a father who never lifted a
finger to do household chores. His dad saw such tasks as women’s work and
couldn’t imagine himself cleaning the floors or changing diapers. Mark, on the
other hand, saw how important it was to his wife Mary that he lend a hand
around the house, so he let his gendered stereotypes go.

This allowed him to overcome his stereotypical understanding of his own
behavior and communicated to his wife a great deal of love and respect.

## Physical touch is a powerful way to show your love.

Did you know that babies who are caressed, held and kissed go on to lead
healthier emotional lives than those who aren’t? It’s true, and it should come
as no surprise that **physical touch** is some people’s primary love language. 

If it’s your partner’s main language you can communicate your love through
physical touch – things like holding hands, kissing, embracing and sexual
intercourse. It’s easy to incorporate such gestures into everyday life by
holding your partner’s hand when in church or on your way to the movies. You
can also try hugging and kissing your partner when someone else is around; it’s
sure to make them feel extra appreciated. 

For instance, Jocelyn Green is married to a military man. Although she and her
partner often can’t be together physically, she’s found ways to feel connected
to him while he’s overseas. If you and your partner also spend a lot of time
away from one another, try to find a way to feel close. Things like wearing one
of your partner’s old shirts while skyping, or sending them a picture, can work
wonders.

But when you **are** with your partner, you can try touching him or her in
unexplored places and asking for feedback about what’s pleasurable. Just
remember, your partner is the only one who can say what feels good to them. In
fact, it’s key for both people in a relationship to take the time to learn how
to touch and please each other. If you’re looking for creative ways to do so
you might find it helpful to study massage or read up on sexual techniques.

It’s also essential to work hard at understanding which subtler forms of
physical contact can fill your partner’s love tank. Vary the pressure of touch.
Experiment! And of course, when it comes to touch, what’s appropriate and
inappropriate can only be determined by you and your partner. That being said,
physical abuse is **always** inappropriate and should be reported immediately.

## Pinpoint your primary love language.

All right, now you know the five love languages, but how can you tell which one
is your **primary** one? It’s actually pretty easy to find out:

First, ask yourself what you most often request of your partner. It’s likely
that the things you ask for the most are the things that you find most
emotionally fulfilling. Then follow your instincts and consider what comes to
mind when you want to feel truly appreciated. Perhaps it’s spending time with
someone or receiving praise.

Once you know what feels good, consider what your partner does that hurts you.
In fact, painful relationship experiences can be an accurate guide to finding
your love language. Just think back on what your partners have **failed** to do
for you in the past. 

For instance, if someone you were close to caused you serious pain or failed to
show you love in the way you wanted, perhaps that person simply failed to
understand the way you desired to be loved. If all such instances fall in the
same category, there’s a good chance that **that **category is your primary
love language. 

But your upbringing also has a major effect on the development of your love
language. So it’s helpful to consider how your parents made you feel loved (or
unloved) while you were growing up. Such memories are another path to figuring
out which language you speak. 

For example, Ella’s main love language is receiving gifts, but to figure that
out she had to think about bad experiences from her childhood. Specifically,
she recalled a Christmas morning when she was a little girl:

Her older brother put little effort into choosing her present and, to save time, gave her something he’d found lying around the house. By recalling this moment and remembering the emotional pain it had caused her, Ella saw how important receiving gifts was (and is!) to her.

And remember: once you pinpoint your and your partner’s love languages, be sure to use that knowledge. After all, communication is what true love is all about.

## Suggested further reading: 30 Lessons for Loving by Karl Pillemer

**30 Lessons for Loving** (2015) shares advice from hundreds of elderly people
to reveal the secrets of building a long-lasting relationship, from first
encounter to “happily ever after.” You’ll learn how to tell if your current
crush might be “the one,” how to communicate in a healthy way and how to keep
the passion alive in a long-term relationship.
