# Do Scale

*by Les McKeown*

Source:
[https://www.blinkist.com/books/do-scale-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/do-scale-en)

![Do
Scale](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5e11eadf6cee070008dc6f17/3_4/470.jpg)

(2019) provides succinct, practical advice for business
founders and leaders wishing to scale their organizations in a
sustainable way. It explains what scaling means, how to
evaluate whether it’s right for your company, the challenges
you’ll personally face, and the mind-set and team you’ll need
to scale successfully.

## Final summary

When a leader decides to scale, they’re often unaware of the
implications this will have for their business, themselves, and
their employees. Choosing to make scaling an organization’s
primary focus means changing its structure, how its managers
work, and, importantly, how its leader makes decisions. 

Scaling forces an organization to set aside its other goals –
some of which will be at the heart of its company values. It
also forces its leader to reevaluate their leadership style.
But if you, as a leader, create a clear vision, design a
management team you can rely on, and regulate your visionary
tendencies, you’re in a strong position to succeed.

## Actionable advice: 

**Overcome the entrepreneur’s alter ego – the arsonist – by
creating an emotional “airlock.”**

A visionary leader often becomes volatile when they have to let
their freedom go in order to scale. To avoid transforming into
your alter ego – a frustrated creature who will lash out at
others – create an emotional “airlock” that you can use to
reset yourself back into the dedicated leader everyone loves.
This might take the form of listening to a favorite podcast in
your car on the way to work or imagining yourself being
neutralized as you take the elevator up to your floor in the
office.

# What’s in it for me? Unlock the secret recipe to scaling your organization successfully.

We live in the age of start-ups. Never before have there been
so many entrepreneurs striking out on their own, bringing their
brilliant ideas to fruition, be they products, causes, or
services. And when these start-ups or fledgling organizations
hit their stride, their leaders will naturally consider
scaling. After all, the idea of skyrocketing profits or
widespread charitable reach is seductive.

If you’re a leader looking to scale a young business, you’ll
probably assume that you’re fully capable of taking your
organization to the next level. After all, you got it through
its infancy – no easy task! But scaling requires a whole
different skill set and strategy to creating a start-up. And
unless you understand its requirements and implications – both
on the company and on you as the leader – the odds of failure
are high. 

So make sure you’re one of the success stories. Don’t charge
into scaling like a bull at a gate and find that you’ve
trampled your chances of sustainable company growth. By
understanding what scaling actually is and what it needs from
you and your employees, you can set yourself up to make your
organization’s market share go through the roof. 

In these blinks, you’ll discover
- what a guitar-maker can teach you about scaling;
- why your golden gut instinct is your scaling nemesis; and
- the surprising machine in which every scaler needs to invest.

# Scaling demands you focus on increasing your market share. 

You’re the founder of a business. Things are going well. Very
well, in fact. You’ve got a steady cash flow and a growing
market share. It’s time to take it to the next level. That
means **scaling**, right? Well, not necessarily.

**The key message is: Scaling demands you focus on increasing
your market share.** 

Scaling is a very specific type of company growth. And it’s not
right for everyone. To understand why, let’s explore the
difference between growth and scaling. 

When it comes to growth, a company’s primary focus is on
improving product quality or increasing profitability. This
results in **linear growth** – growing the company steadily,
over time. If we plot this type of company growth on a graph,
we’ll see a straight line rising at an angle.

But the purpose of scaling is to achieve dramatic growth. In
most cases, this means sustainably but quickly increasing a
company’s market share. Scaling is often referred to as
**exponential growth**. If we plot this on a graph, we’ll get a
line that looks like the letter “J”: The line will dip a little
at first before spiking steeply at a sharp angle. 

Scaling sounds great, doesn’t it? After all, who doesn’t want
to increase their market share at lightning speed? 

Well, scaling might be great in theory, but it’s easier said
than done. To scale successfully, you have to change the
primary focus of your business to increasing market share.
Every other focus – from making the best product to training
your staff to the highest level – must be secondary to this
main goal. If they aren’t, you won’t succeed in scaling. 

Since scaling requires this ruthless deprioritization of other
company goals, it’s not always the right option. 

Take Jim the luthier – or guitar-maker. Jim’s business was
booming**.** His high-quality guitars were in demand, and his
revenues were increasing. At this point, he considered scaling.
But then he paused. Scaling would mean a complete refocus on
maximizing market share. He’d have to divert his own time to
attend strategy meetings, develop business plans, and manage
sales staff. Crucially, this would mean spending less time on
his true passion – making world-class guitars. So Jim didn’t
scale. Instead, he sold his business to a bigger company for a
profit and continued working as an artisan.

Being clear about his priorities helped Jim realize that
scaling wasn’t for him. But, unlike Jim, you might look at your
options and decide that scaling is the logical next step. In
the next blink, we’ll learn more about your options.

# Your attitude to generating profit will determine how you should grow.

OK, you’ve decided that scaling is right for you. Now, like a
primed thoroughbred ready for a race, you’re chomping at the
bit to start strategizing. But hold on! There’s one more thing
to consider before you throw yourself into scaling at full
speed: **sustainability.**

**The key message in this blink is: Your attitude to generating
profit will determine how you should grow.**

When it comes to exponential growth, scaling isn’t the **only**
route. **Flipping **is another option you can consider.

Flipping means generating the maximum market share possible in
the shortest period. The ultimate aim of the flipper is to find
a quick buyer for their business. To do this, leaders will grow
market share at any expense. This often means investing
significantly in marketing, selling their product below cost
price, or even giving it away for free**.** Everything is
sacrificed to generating immediate and rapid market growth.

Scalers, on the other hand, seek to secure growth that is
sustainable over a long time. A leader scaling a commercial
business will have sales on their mind – the sale of products
or services. Selling the company itself won’t be on the agenda.

If the difference between the two still isn’t clear, consider
this analogy. 

Think of scalers like property developers. After extensive
consideration, they mindfully purchase land and build a
carefully designed neighborhood that they can sell or rent to
generate profit. Flippers have a different mind-set. In real
estate terms, they buy a dilapidated house, renovate it
quickly, and sell it for a profit as soon as they can. In other
words, flipping is quick and dirty. Scaling is considered and
deliberate. 

As you’ve probably realized by now, flipping is neither
sustainable nor for the faint-hearted. It’s very risky: many
leaders don’t find the buyers they seek. So why would you flip
instead of scale? Well, it’s all down to your circumstances.

Perhaps you’ve realized that you don’t have the resources to
develop your product or maintain customer interest. For
example, a start-up app developer might have sunk all their
ideas and know-how into their first product, an exciting game.
The game is successful, but the developer knows it’s the best
they can make. As they can’t grow the product or business
themselves, they’re better off selling it to a bigger company –
a company that can take the business to the next level. The
developer can then use the profit to start something new.

So are you a flipper or scaler? To decide which you are,
reflect on your attitude toward turning a profit. Are you in it
for the long haul or are you willing to take a gamble on a
buyer coming through?

# A specific and tailored scale vision will determine how you want your organization to grow.

OK, you’ve decided to** scale **your organization. Now to
clarify the growth goals of your company. It’s time to work out
how you’re going to rapidly – but sustainably – increase your
market share. But what should these growth goals – or **scale
vision** – look like?

**The key message here is: A specific and tailored scale
vision will determine how you want your organization to
grow.**

The parameters of your scale vision will be guided by certain
factors. These might include whether your organization is
commercial or not-for-profit, how you want to grow, or how
you’ll assess your success. For instance, you might be aiming
to increase profit, physical presence in the market, or your
customer base. Whichever benchmarks you choose, they will
become the cornerstone of your scale vision. 

Next, it’s time to define the market segments in which you want
to engage. Say you want to turn your handful of local cafés
into a chain. You’ll need to decide whether to expand into
neighboring towns, nationally or internationally. Remember, you
don’t have to conquer the whole market immediately. You can
always scale again at a later stage. 

Once you’ve identified your target market segment, calculate
the maximum potential growth that’s possible in your sector.
This will differ greatly, depending on your industry. A
not-for-profit guide dog association has the potential to be
much greater in size than a neighborhood shelter for single
mothers. To do this, use the internet to research the growth
potential of your organization. Much like market segment, you
don’t need to scale to the outer limits of your industry. But
it’s still good to know just how much potential growth is
available. 

The next step is to give yourself a realistic time frame for
achieving your goals. Don’t constrain yourself with a detailed
schedule or fixed deadline. You’re looking for a broad time
frame – something that will provide you with a bit of
structure. 

Finally, it’s time to write your scale vision based on the
benchmarks you’ve chosen. If your benchmark is market presence,
your vision might look something like this: “Over the next
three years, we will scale Cameron’s Cafés by opening six new
cafés across Texas.” If revenue is your benchmark, your
statement might be: “In five years, we will scale Toni’s
Toothbrushes to $85 million in revenue through sales across the
USA and Canada.” Not-for-profits might have a scale vision
like: “By 2022, we will scale Free Meals for Kids to deliver
daily breakfasts to underprivileged students in 45 schools
across Louisiana.”

Whatever it looks like, your scale vision will act as your True
North. It’ll help you stay on track as you navigate the
often-tumultuous waters of Scaling Sea.

# To successfully scale your organization, you must retrain your instincts. 

Zuckerberg, Winfrey, Musk, Rowling … entrepreneurs are
surrounded by alluring mythology. We cannot get enough of
independent, visionary leaders. We believe their phenomenal
instinct for making astute, on-the-spot decisions is the
cornerstone of their success. Yet in reality, the independently
minded business leader can only take a business so far. 

In fact, infallible gut instincts are actually a liability when
it comes to scaling. There’s no getting over it; scaling is a
complex and rigorous process. It requires careful planning and
a strong team. There’s little room for gut instincts.

**The key message here is: To successfully scale your
organization, you must retrain your instincts.** 

During a company’s infancy, its leader will typically make
decisions based on **visceral management**. The leader will
draw on her knowledge and experience to generate and execute
solutions. Visceral management is perfect for a small, agile
company. But if decisions are made with visceral management
during the complex process of scaling, the organization will
crumble. 

Here’s why.

Firstly, when scaling, the leader will need to rely on hard
data. Gone are the days of relying on anecdotal information.
Scaling requires making careful, considered decisions, and
there is a lot at stake. Make the wrong decisions and you might
be left with inequitable contracts with suppliers, or too much
invested in stock you can’t sell. Only data can help you make
the right decisions.

Secondly, a leader needs to stop making all the decisions
herself. She won’t have time, and she won’t always be the right
person to make every decision. This can be particularly
challenging for the avidly autonomous entrepreneur used to
being involved in everything. But giving up control is vital.
If she doesn’t let go of some of her authority, she’ll either
become a bottleneck or will make poor decisions. 

The good news is that you can change your behavior to support
the scaling process. To do so, commit to the following basic
rules: 

1. Always assume that you don’t know everything; 
2. Always assume that you’ll make a better decision if other
   people have input; 
3. Always ask yourself who will best advise you; 
4. Diligently store data for quick retrieval – this will stop
   you from making rash decisions; 
5. Delegate decision-making as much as possible; and, finally, 
6. Fine-tune your intuition by staying informed about the
   decisions your employees are making and the outcomes of
   those decisions. 

You may be reluctant to let your independence go. After all,
it’s seen you through the challenges of establishing a
business. But, unless you follow the six rules and consciously
change the way that you work, you cannot successfully scale.

# Scaling demands that leaders put aside their visionary qualities – this isn’t easy.

There’s no easy way to break this to you: most entrepreneurs
aren’t natural scalers. Most entrepreneurs long for autonomy
and the flexibility to explore. But an organization that’s
being scaled has different requirements to one that’s finding
its feet; it needs focus and discipline.** **

Scaling is a mundane and repetitive process. It will likely
frustrate you. So, if you’re going to last the distance, you
need to be aware of how you might react to it.

**The key message here is: Scaling demands that leaders put
aside their visionary qualities – this isn’t easy.**

**Freedom** is an entrepreneur’s jam. It’s often why they leave
traditional employment behind and strike out on their own. But
freedom is the natural enemy of scaling. Scaling requires
diligent commitment and consistency. And when many
entrepreneurs are denied their freedom, they explode with
frustration. Sometimes they even dismantle the systems they’ve
put in place because they’re too impatient to wait for results.
In short, they become their own saboteur. 

Let’s look at how you can counter this. 

To avoid self-combustion, tune into your** self-talk**. If you
catch yourself wondering how long you can keep the whole
scaling gig up, or convincing yourself that you’re fine when
you’re not, you’re going to erupt. Remedy this by giving
yourself an outlet. Try advising a new start-up or taking a
creative retreat. Better to step out of the office for a few
hours than shower it with molten lava!

Next, keep an eye on how tightly you’re gripping the reins.
Believing that no one else can do something as well as you
won’t do you any favors while you’re scaling. So, train your
staff so they can take some weight off your shoulders. If
there’s no one internal to whom you can delegate, hire an
external contractor with the right skill set.

Finally, reassess your expectations. If you’ve built a
start-up, you’ve been conditioned to a fast pace. But scaling
is primarily operational and administrative. It takes time to
put in place the systems that it needs – something you’ll
simply have to accept.

By being aware of how you might react to the demands of
scaling, you’ll be better placed to wrangle your inevitable
frustration. 

> “Scaling is built on mastering the mundane, and you need to
> know that going in.”

# Scaling requires a new approach to making decisions. 

By this stage, you might be feeling discouraged. After all,
we’ve just you that told your amazing entrepreneurial talents
won’t make you a successful scaler. You might be thinking, “Why
can’t I keep trusting my gut and making decisions on the fly?
It’s taken me this far!”

But in reality, once a business grows beyond the start-up
phase, we have to make decisions in a more considered manner.

**The key message in this blink is: Scaling requires a new
approach to making decisions. **

The secret to making effective decisions in a complex business
environment is **High-Quality Team-Based Decision-Making**,
otherwise known as HQTBDM. This style of decision-making
supports scaling rather than just linear growth.

HQTBDM involves four components.

Firstly, **teams **must make decisions, not individuals. Say
goodbye to everyone doing their own thing. Instead, get into
the habit of scheduling meetings, both to plan what needs to
happen and to evaluate outcomes.

Next, distinguish between making a decision and implementing
it. In a start-up, it’s typical that whoever makes a decision
will roll it out. But if you’re a leader or manager in a
complex organization, it isn’t viable to do the grunt work and
make the decisions. Time to divvy up those two distinctive
activities.

Thirdly**,** you need to slow down the decision-making process.
This might mean you dedicate time to studying data, consulting
with colleagues, or researching possible solutions rather than
just acting on instinct. Before you panic, this doesn’t mean
that implementing decisions will also slow down. In fact,
you’ll probably find that implementation happens more quickly.
Why? Because all that time researching means you’ll spot any
potential glitches before rolling out a decision – not while
it’s being rolled out. 

Finally**,** view data as sacred. In the past, you may have
made decisions based on anecdotal feedback. This isn’t going to
work when you scale. Every decision you make must be guided by
real data. Otherwise, your decisions will be based on
assumptions, not evidence. 

Now that you’ve learned the ridiculous acronym that’ll
revolutionize your decision-making, it’s time to implement it.
In the next blink, we’ll explore how to build your very own
HQTBDM machine.

# A functional org chart provides effective, team-based decision-making.

Alright, visionary leaders, time for a guessing game! Can you
guess which crucial tool you need to build a well-oiled
decision-making machine, one that can function without you
micromanaging?

The answer is far from sexy. It’s your **org chart **– or
**organizational chart**. 

**The key message: A functional org chart provides effective,
team-based decision-making.**

So, how do you create a structure that** works?**

Start by examining what your employees actually do rather than
what their job specs say they do. This might mean shadowing
them on a typical workday. Don’t make assumptions about their
tasks. Often as a business evolves, employees take on work that
wasn’t originally assigned to them. They have to evolve to get
jobs done. At the end of this process, evaluate – and
potentially rewrite – job specifications.

Next, clarify the chain of command. Is there a clear hierarchy
in place? Does each employee report to one specific manager?
It’s common for these lines to blur, as a company grows. For
example, in the early days, it may have been logical for both
your sales and marketing teams to report to the chief revenue
officer. But now that you’re aiming to grow your market share,
your marketing team will need their own dedicated manager.

Pay attention to information flow as well. Don’t forget:
information is data, and data is sacred! Identify your
information sources, then make sure there’s a system in place
to get data to the people who’ll need it to make decisions.
This might be a shared drive with a clear protocol for data
storage or regular meetings where someone is appointed to take
minutes.

In your investigations, you might also discover that your
company is missing a few key roles, like a talent manager in
your HR Department. Or you might realize that scaling will
create new roles, like a customer care manager. Even if you
don’t need them yet, pencil them into your org chart, so you
know where they’ll sit in your machine.

Once your org chart is watertight, you’re ready for the final
stage of preparation. Let’s get stuck into it in the next
blink.

# To scale effectively, managers must prioritize the organization’s needs over their team’s. 

Steering an organization through scaling means evaluating which
employees you can trust. 

If you’re lucky, you’ll already have some quality managers
within your ranks. It’s likely that these people will be
skilled in **vertical management**. This means that they take
responsibility for the employees answering to them and for
their team’s goals. 

Sounds like the perfect manager, doesn’t it? 

While vertical management is essential in any complex business,
it’s only one side of the coin when it comes to scaling.
Scaling requires you to increase market share dramatically in a
sustainable way. And this requires **lateral management** – the
ability to make decisions based on what will best serve the
organization, not just one team. 

**The key message here is: To** **scale effectively, managers
must prioritize the organization’s needs over their team’s.** 

Lateral management will be a foreign concept to many members of
your management team. So how can you equip them with this new
skill?

First of all, teach your managers **Enterprise Commitment**.
They’ll likely cringe, but have them verbally promise to put
the needs of the company **before **the needs of their team.
Reinforce the importance of their promise by reading out a
statement of commitment at the beginning of each meeting. Then,
post this statement in common areas. Over time, constantly
reinforcing enterprise commitment will help managers adopt a
mind-set that focuses on the organization’s goals ahead of
their own. 

Next, identify their **internal customers**. Which departments
rely on which teams and managers? What are the expectations of
these departments? For example, your IT team might help
external customers place orders online. But your marketing team
might need them to change the company website to attract
potential customers. This means the marketing team is the IT
team’s internal customer. Encourage managers and teams to view
their internal and external customers with equal importance.
Doing this will support the internal processes that are vital
for scaling, rather than just meeting the demands of the
public.

Finally, insist on a culture of open and constructive
communication. During meetings, encourage every individual to
raise objections and dissents – both their own and their
team’s. This helps counteract any unhappiness that employees
might have when implementing a decision with which they
disagree. When everyone feels heard, they’re more likely to be
on board with a decision. This attitude toward communication
might result in some fiery meetings, but it’s more likely to
lead to calm and committed behavior afterward.

Once you’ve retrained your managers, you’ve successfully
graduated from Scaling Bootcamp. You’ve evaluated whether
scaling is right for you, shifted your mind-set, built your
decision-making team, and equipped your leaders with the skills
they need to operate it. Congratulations, you’re ready to see
your market share soar!

## What to read next: The Infinite Game, by Simon Sinek

As we’ve just explored, the characteristic that distinguishes
scaling from other forms of business growth is sustainability.
The purpose of scaling isn’t just to make the big bucks
quickly. It’s about establishing an infrastructure that
supports ongoing exponential growth of market share.

But once you’ve successfully scaled, how do you ensure that
your organization continues not only to survive but to thrive?
To discover the five key practices that will foster your
business’s long-term goals and values, check out the blinks to
**The Infinite Game**, by organizational consultant Simon
Sinek. 
