# WOLFPACK by Abby Wambach

Source:
[https://www.blinkist.com/books/reader/wolfpack-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/reader/wolfpack-en)

![WOLFPACK](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5cdc67cf6cee0700081dbdbf/1_1/470.jpg)

WOLFPACK (2019) is a rallying cry for women to join together, empower each
other and celebrate one another’s achievements. Drawing on her incredible
career as a professional athlete, author Abby Wambach explores how women
everywhere can gain strength in numbers and achieve equality, fulfillment and
joy.

# What’s in it for me? Make female solidarity your goal.

When it comes to gender equality, society still has a long way to go. Even in
today’s supposedly woke world, many women are still playing by the old rules of
the patriarchy. These rules tell girls not to venture off the beaten track.
They tell women to be thankful for what they’re given and not to ask for more.
Worst of all, they tell females that other women are the competition, and they
must be in a constant battle for scarce feminine power.

Thankfully, Abby Wambach is here to give you some new rules. Drawing on nearly
two decades of teamwork and sporting successes with other women, Wambach will
show you that, far from being your adversaries, other women are your wolf pack.
With them at your side, you can achieve bigger goals, overcome any obstacles in
your way and unleash your true potential.

In these blinks, you’ll discover
- why women need to embrace failure;
- how gratitude can hold women back; and
- the qualities a great leader really needs.

# Trailblazing women are less like Little Red Riding Hood and more like the wolf.

Society likes to remind us that disobedient girls pay a high price for their
waywardness. Just consider the tale of Little Red Riding Hood, the young girl
who ignores clear instructions to continue along the path and avoid the woods.
What happens to her? The Big Bad Wolf, that’s what. The moral of this fairytale
is obvious – rules exist to be followed, and little girls shouldn’t get too
curious.

And yet, as she reflects on her life and career, Abby Wambach can’t see a lot
of truth in this old story. In fact, the best things in her life happened when
she followed in Little Red Riding Hood’s footsteps and veered off the beaten
track.

As a teenager, for example, Wambach dated boys. Why? Because it seemed to be
what every other girl her age was doing. But something was missing from these
early encounters, and during high school, she realized she was gay. Scared of
her family’s judgment, Wambach initially hid this part of her identity, even
from herself. Toward the end of high school, though, she fell in love and
finally embraced her sexuality. This was her first taste of what it meant to
step off the beaten path and go against the grain, following her heart rather
than the status quo.

Wambach’s most cherished role models are women who have chosen their own way in
life, too. Indeed, Wambach’s incredible sporting career couldn’t have happened
without the trailblazing female soccer players that came before her, who
refused to accept the status quo and the idea that soccer was a man’s sport.
These were the women who went into battle to bring about Title IX, the federal
law dictating that no one, whether male or female, should experience
educational discrimination, including on the sports field. It was these women
who created leagues for professional women’s soccer and fought for a living
wage for professional female soccer players.

Given how much of her career and happiness has come about by her and other
women’s refusal to do what society tells them to do, or stay on the designated
path, Wambach now believes that all women should strive to be less like Little
Red Riding Hood, and more like the wolf – powerful, courageous, and hungry for
more.

# Gratitude is good, but equality is better.

When Wambach retired from professional soccer in 2015, ESPN honored her
incredible career with an Icon Award at their glamorous awards show, the ESPYS.
Standing on the stage that night, Wambach was filled with gratitude toward the
sporting world for allowing her to experience this moment. But as she lay in
bed that night, her ears still ringing with applause, the gratitude melted away
and was replaced with a darker emotion – anger.

Wambach’s rage stemmed from a moment earlier in the evening when she had shared
the ESPYS stage with two more retiring athletes who also received Icon awards,
Kobe Bryant and Peyton Manning.

As she, Bryant and Manning left the stage, it suddenly struck Wambach that,
though all three of them were world-class athletes with equal amounts of grit,
commitment and dedication to their sports, there was one inescapable difference
between her and them. They were men, and she was a woman, which meant that
while they could look forward to a leisurely retirement, she would have to
think about her next career move. Bryant and Manning had financial freedom,
something rarely afforded to female athletes.

Even a brief glance at the numbers highlights the frustrating inequity between
male and female sports stars.

For instance, the male winners of the 2018 FIFA World Cup collectively took
home a staggering $38 million, nineteen times more money than the Women’s World
Cup winners were awarded in 2015. This inequality is even more shocking when
you consider the fact that the U.S. Women’s National Soccer Team brought in
over $6 million in revenue, while their male counterparts made less than $2
million.

Of course, the gender pay gap isn’t just a problem in sports. It’s an issue for
women everywhere. In 2018, American women in **every** age group and industry
made just 81% of their male equivalents’ earnings.

What’s the cause of this continuing inequality? Wambach believes that part of
the problem is gratitude, that fleeting emotion she experienced on the ESPYS
stage that night. Specifically, women are often so overwhelmed with gratitude
at just being included, recognized or given a paycheck at all that they’re
fearful of asking for more.

To close the gender pay gap, women must learn to use their voices and demand
equality.

# Women need to embrace failure and use it to empower themselves.

As a promising young player on the Youth National team, Wambach was given an
exciting peek into her idols’ lives during a tour of the U.S. Women’s National
Soccer Team locker room. As she tried to take in everything around her, one
item stood out – a photograph. Someone had put up an image from the 1995 world
cup match between the U.S. Women’s Team and their Norwegian counterparts. But
something didn’t make sense. Wambach knew that this was a game that her heroes
had lost. Why, she wondered, was a photo of their defeat taking pride of place
in their locker room?

Five years on, when she joined the national team herself, Wambach finally
plucked up the courage to ask about that photograph. The answer she received
would change her outlook on failure forever.

Veterans on the team told her that although their biggest priority was to win
games, that didn’t mean that they were scared of losing them. Far from
rejecting the idea of failure, the team was determined to remember every single
setback they had endured. Why? Because to these players, failure meant one
thing – fuel. Fuel to get out there and prove to themselves that they could
come back stronger than ever.

Did this strategy work? Well, Wambach’s teammates said the year after they put
up that photograph, they won their first gold medal at the Olympics. This story
taught Wambach to harness the potential of failure.

Unfortunately, many women are never able to do that. They believe they must do
everything perfectly, an old expectation imposed by the patriarchy. This means
that when women experience failure and realize they aren’t perfect, they lose
their nerve. They start to believe they were imposters all along.

In contrast, men are more comfortable with their own imperfections and don’t
see any reason why they shouldn’t succeed and lead despite them. Just consider
the fact that imperfect men have been given permission to rule the world
throughout history – from the Roman emperors to every single U.S. president.

So, when it comes to failure, take a page out of the U.S. Women’s National
Soccer Team’s book – or simply do as men have been doing for thousands of
years.

# Women need to celebrate each other, both on and off the playing field.

The most exhilarating moments of any soccer match come when a goal is scored.
During her extraordinary career, Wambach has been responsible for many of these
moments herself. In fact, in international games alone, she’s scored 184 goals!
But if you get a chance to see her score, take a closer look at what she does
in the seconds after the ball hits the back of the net. Look carefully, and
you’ll see that as her ecstatic teammates run toward her, Wambach is always
pointing at them.

What’s behind this trademark gesture? Recognition. She’s pointing at the other
players in recognition that it was they who made her success possible.

That’s the thing about soccer. Even though you might be the one who scored the
goal, you couldn’t have done it without the protection of your team’s
defenders, the boundless energy of your midfielders or the players on the bench
who spurred you on with their tireless cheering. When players celebrate a goal,
they’re not really cheering themselves – they’re celebrating their teammates
above all else.

Of course, in soccer and in life, there are times when it won’t be you who
scores. It will be the woman beside you. In these moments, it’s crucial that
you start running in her direction, celebrating her achievement.

On the field, this sort of behavior is commonplace. But in real life, women can
find it harder to praise each other’s successes. Society gives women the
message that they are competitors against each other, instead of champions for
one another. Women have been told that female power is a scarce resource.

Wambach believes that this scarcity is nothing but an illusion. Female power,
happiness and achievement aren’t zero-sum games or a cake in which a larger
piece for one of us means a smaller piece for the rest. Instead, we should be
thinking of female empowerment as an infinite fountain from which we all can
drink.

Once we realize we have nothing to fear from each other’s success, we can all
help each other to drink from this fountain. We can stop fighting each other
for that one token chair at the table of patriarchy. Instead, we’ll work
together to construct a bigger, better table, with a seat for every one of us.

# Wambach turned on her full power when she witnessed her idol unleashing hers.

When Wambach was just eighteen years old, she had the chance to test her mettle
against one of her heroes. The hero in question was Michelle Akers, one of the
world’s greatest soccer players. As luck would have it, Akers needed to get
some extra training in, and she agreed to play a match against Wambach’s youth
team. By the end of the game, Wambach’s view of herself was permanently
changed.

Despite the exciting circumstances, the game started in a relaxed fashion, with
Akers giving her younger opponents plenty of coaching tips on how to improve
their game. However, as the match headed into its final minutes, Akers realized
that her own team was three goals down, and in serious danger of losing.

That’s when Akers took control. Without a second thought, she screamed at her
teammate to give her the ball. Once she had it in her possession, Akers
dribbled it confidently down the pitch, effortlessly bypassing Wambach’s whole
team, and kicked the ball into the back of their net. Then she did exactly the
same thing again. Three more times, until she had won the game.

Seeing Akers demand to be passed the ball that day, not just once, but four
times, changed Wambach’s outlook forever.

Until that match, Wambach had been afraid to showcase her talents. Deep down,
she worried that her teammates would resent her for outshining them. Thus, in
an effort to be humble and avoid offending anyone, she had only been playing at
around three-quarters of her capacity.

But then she witnessed Akers demanding the ball. Here was a woman who burned
with power and competitive spirit. Here was a player who shamelessly shouted
out her desire to win, and who clearly believed she was the woman who could
make that win happen.

When Akers screamed at the goalie to give her the ball, she was announcing her
confidence in her own ability and giving the game her full talent – not just
some of it, as Wambach had been doing. Seeing Akers deploy every bit of her
power that day freed Wambach to unleash hers, too. Even now, whenever she feels
unworthy or incapable of doing something, she thinks back to that game, and
Akers’s unabashed determination to win.

**“When you stand up and demand the ball, you give others permission to do the
same.”**

# Great leaders are authentic, vulnerable and take suggestions from everyone.

Sometimes it’s easier to be aggressive than vulnerable. In 2008, the U.S.
Women’s National Soccer Team knew all about aggression. They were the world’s
best team, and the secret of their success was physical dominance. Under
Wambach’s co-captaincy, the team unashamedly won games by intimidating and
strong-arming their opponents.

So imagine the team’s horror when their new coach, Pia Sundhage, produced a
guitar during their first training session together, and gently sang a Bob
Dylan song to them.

What was the rationale behind Pia’s singing session that day?

Well, she wanted to show Wambach and her teammates that leadership doesn’t
always have to resemble power and dominance. By reaching for her guitar, Pia
gave the players an example of an authentic, vulnerable leader who wasn’t
afraid to reveal her true personality. Through this eccentric performance, Pia
demonstrated that the best leaders don’t imitate society’s ideas of how a
leader should behave – they simply strive to be themselves.

Interestingly, Pia’s unconventional leadership style led to positive and
permanent changes in how the whole team interacted with each other. Before her
arrival, the team was run like a dictatorship. Wambach and other senior figures
issued instructions, while more junior players had little input into
decision-making.

But under Pia’s tutelage, the team’s ideas about leadership all began to
change. Wambach and the other captains permitted themselves to be more
vulnerable and began listening to what others had to say. And the more junior
players saw that if Pia could make herself vulnerable and still be a leader,
maybe they could also find ways to lead.

Gradually, the team’s leadership structure became more democratic. Newbies like
Alex Morgan gave Wambach tips on how to play better, players on the bench gave
the starting players advice and even the team’s physiotherapists started to
make suggestions.

Wambach believes that all teams, even beyond sports, can learn a lesson from
this shift in how we define leadership. Specifically, we can learn that the
best teamwork occurs when leaders aren’t afraid to discard old hierarchies and
listen to their followers’ voices. If you’re a leader who’s humble and
authentic enough to do this, you may just find that everyone in the team has a
valuable contribution to make.

# Every woman needs a wolf pack, so reach out to yours.

After seventeen incredible years of professional soccer, Wambach finally
retired. And with retirement came rest. In fact, she gave her body a full three
years to recover from decades of physical exertion. When that time was up, she
got back into exercise by starting a running program. This should have been
easy for a former professional sportswoman, right? Wrong. Every time she ran,
Wambach’s whole body ached.

After years of doing far more exercise than this, Wambach wondered, why was she
suffering so much now?

Eventually, her friend Michele hit on the problem. When Wambach pushed herself
to the limit on the soccer pitch, she was part of a team of other women who
were all doing the same. Physical pain and suffering were part of the job, but
hardship was softened by plenty of jokes and words of encouragement shared by
teammates. Now she was a lone wolf, without the support and camaraderie of her
wolf pack.

It’s not just in sports that we need a wolf pack to share tough times with. In
fact, women in all walks of life need sisterly support and encouragement.
Wambach discussed this need for greater female solidarity in her commencement
address to Barnard College, one of America’s most prestigious women’s
universities. To her surprise, the speech went viral.

Ordinary women reached out to Wambach, saying they were reading her speech to
their young daughters at bedtime and telling their girlfriends about it. Some
were even hanging wolf pictures in their homes to symbolize the need for more
female wolf packs. As one woman who wrote to Wambach poignantly put it, men
have always had their clubs, while women tend to feel alone. Whether we’re the
token woman in the boardroom, the single mother at the playground or the
housewife home alone, we are often isolated.

So, how can we start building these wolf packs in our lives?

Wambach believes that all you can do when attempting something new is to get
out there and try. When it comes to building your wolf pack, this means seeking
out women you trust and respect. It’s this philosophy that enabled Wambach and
her teammates to win the World Cup in 2015, and to take gold medals in the
Olympic Games – not just once, but twice.

In fact, running with her pack of fierce and courageous women has rewarded
Wambach with an extraordinary career and a lifetime of making her own choices,
rather than following other people’s rules. Though you might not lead your wolf
pack to sporting fame and glory, you can still gather women together, form
unbreakable bonds and agree to go forward in a spirit of sisterhood, connection
and joy.

**“Whether you’re a mom, a college student, a CEO, or a little girl, you need a
crew of brave and honest women.”**

# Final summary

**Life in a patriarchal world convinces many women that they should color
within the lines and never allow themselves to be powerful. But women like Abby
Wambach and her teammates have learned to reject these limits by ditching the
old rules of female animosity, womanly perfection and staying on the beaten
track, and you can, too. Seek out brave, fierce females, and hold them close.
Celebrate their wins, reach out for their love and support and show them the
full force of your talent and power.**

Actionable advice: **Captain your own ship.**

Sometimes life leaves us on the sidelines. Instead of managing that big project
at work, you’re stuck at home with the kids. Rather than being promoted, you’re
still in the same job you’ve been doing for years. But just because you’re not
front and center, this doesn’t mean you can’t be a leader. In fact, there’s
ample opportunity for leadership in all of our lives – no matter our role.
Whether you’re helping your elderly parent through their illness or cheering on
your child as they play their first soccer game, it’s important to remember
that leadership isn’t something that someone else gives to you. It’s actually
the inherent right of women everywhere to determine their own future and to
guide those whom they love.

## What to read next: Unstoppable, by Maria Sharapova

If you’ve been inspired by Abby Wambach’s rallying cry for female solidarity,
why not dive into the story of another sporting legend by checking out the
blinks to tennis star Maria Sharapova’s autobiography, **Unstoppable**.

Chronicling Sharapova’s extraordinary life, from her childhood escape from the
Chernobyl disaster to her incredible career achievements, **Unstoppable** is a
testimony to the power of an iron will and unwavering determination. So if
you’re ready for fresh tales of female strength and sporting excellence, head
over to our blinks to **Unstoppable**.  

