# Do Design

*by Alan Moore*

Source: [https://www.blinkist.com/books/do-design-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/do-design-en)

![Do Design](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5dfcb6d76cee07000788a237/3_4/470.jpg)

Do Design is a nifty handbook for designers, crafters, and creatives of every
stripe who want to know what makes design great and how they can achieve it in
their own work. Covering a broad notion of design,

# Final summary

It should be our guiding philosophy to create and spread beauty in the world.
That means dedicating ourselves to our work with the spirit of a craftsman and
designing objects with the users’ experience in mind. We can improve the
creative process by practicing techniques that help us to be susceptible to
inspiration, and by learning to express our vision for a product’s future. We
can also improve the design of our businesses by learning from other successful
businesses, by promoting openness and collaboration in the workplace, and by
always seeking to see the bigger picture.

# Actionable advice: Make sure you always have an ideas notebook on you.

Inspiration often comes at awkward times, and it can vanish just as promptly.
It can be immensely useful to carry an** ideas notebook** around with you so
you can jot down ideas and doodles when you’re on the go. So think about
purchasing a pretty little notebook and a pen for yourself, preferably
something that’ll slip easily into your pocket or purse.

# What’s in it for me? Create more and create beautifully.

Are you in a creative rut? When was the last time you painted, crafted, or
turned a vision you had into reality? Perhaps you don’t think you’re the
creative type. Whether you’re already a creative looking to refine and master
your craft, or you’re just dipping your toe into creative design for the first
time, you should understand that everybody has the capacity to create beautiful
things. There’s nothing more essentially human than the act of creation.

These blinks will help you to become clearer about what constitutes beauty in
design. They provide plenty of examples and advice to inspire you to start
creating beautiful things yourself. In the process, you’ll learn how even your
life could benefit from a redesign. And, for those designers who work with a
team or who run their own businesses, these blinks also provide some
suggestions for structuring a business for optimal results.

Along the way, you’ll also learn
- how a fringe religious sect had a huge impact on modern design;
- how literature contributes to technological progress; and,
- what astronauts can tell us about designing a business.

# Beautiful design empowers human abilities and brings people joy.

Here’s an important design maxim: **design** is everywhere. There’s design in
the planning of our cities, in the way our institutions are organized, in the
architecture of our living spaces, and in every object we use and take for
granted. There’s even design in how we structure our own lives.

Yet, it must be said, humans don’t always design with beauty and grace. But
this doesn’t have to be the case. To give another maxim of design: anything
that humans design can be designed better.

So, what if we designed everything in our world to be beautiful?

That’s not to say that we should add decorative elements to everything. We
often think of beauty as this additional thing that we sometimes add to things
to make them prettier. But this is the wrong way to think about beauty. When it
comes to design, beauty boils down to two things: fulfilling a function well
and bringing joy. Conversely, bad design more often than not inhibits and
frustrates us. To give a modest example, a beautifully crafted pair of socks
protects our feet and gives us pleasure when we wear them, whereas poorly
crafted socks may chafe our feet and fray quickly. And where’s the joy in that?

We shouldn’t underestimate the power that design has over people’s quality of
life. So if we had the choice, why wouldn’t we create things that work, last,
and can be loved?

As creatives and designers, creating beauty and disseminating it throughout the
world should be our guiding philosophy. The beauty we create is what will
endure when we’re no longer around. It’s our legacy on this earth.

In the next two blinks, we’ll consider the two sides of design – production,
and use – to gain some insight into how we can make the things we create more
beautiful.

**“Beauty is what lends things their immortality.”**

# Beauty for a producer means creating authentically and with the dedication of a craftsman.

One thing’s for sure: it takes time, commitment, and practice to produce truly
beautiful things. 

Consider how a piece of paper in the hands of an origami master can be reshaped
into any number of exquisite forms – a swan or an orchid, for example. In
unpracticed hands, it can’t even be folded into a simple airplane that can fly.

If we’re to be motivated to pour time and effort into a craft, we better be
passionate about it. You can’t truly give the love, care and attention a craft
requires if you don’t think what you’re doing is valuable. That’s why what you
design should be an authentic reflection of you.

Think about this. When the martial arts master Morihei Ueshiba decided to
renounce violence, he gave up martial arts and began developing the non-violent
practice of Aikido which emphasizes peace, calm and inner strength. By
remaining true to himself, Ueshiba was guided to innovate old practices into
something that brings meaning and pleasure to many people’s lives.

That being said, creative endeavor is as much about producing the spirit of the
craftsman as about producing something beautiful. When a person dedicates
herself to a craft, her inner life is imbued with passion and a determination
to improve herself.

This was certainly true for the Shakers, a minor eighteenth-century Christian
denomination. While the sect no longer exists – owing probably to their
insistence on celibacy – the elegant simplicity and functionality of Shaker
design has had a lasting influence on modernism, especially in furniture and
architecture.

How could this small sect have had such a big influence on modern design? The
key was their attitude to craftsmanship. In a community where the sexes were
segregated and marriage prohibited, dedication to one’s work was one of the few
acceptable outlets. In applying themselves to a craft, they learned to focus
their minds and keep them from straying toward ungodly things. Through
craftsmanship, a Shaker found meaning and dignity in life, and the result was
some exceptional pieces of design.

So we have to wonder, does the Shaker’s view of craftsmanship reflect the
values of a time gone by, or should we reclaim this philosophy for modern
times?

The answer is we could. While we don’t have to be celibate, we can adopt the
same attitude toward the work we do, namely, to strive to become the best at it
that we can be. In challenging ourselves to raise the standard of our work to a
craft, we give purpose to our lives and we produce beautiful things for others
to enjoy.

# Beauty for a user means an object functions well and brings them joy.

Of course, if a product is to be successful on the market, it will have to
appeal to the people who buy and use it. The key to a successful and enduring
business is designing beautiful products.

Beauty in design is less about aesthetic beauty and more about how well it
helps us perform certain tasks. After all, there’s beauty in a bed that gives
us a full night’s rest, even if we are unconscious when we use it.

In fact, the more smoothly an object helps us perform a task, the less we’re
aware of what it looks like. A well-designed laptop, for example, should
facilitate a strong workflow without interrupting us. When a laptop is noisy,
clunky or dysfunctional, we notice it more, because it interrupts our workflow.

So, when we design a product, we need to attend to the experience people have
when they use it. That means designing products that feel easy, intuitive, and
joyful to use.

Good design is instinctive. People just know whether a design is good or bad
from the way it feels to use. Just as a three-legged chair would feel
horrendous to sit on, the experience of reading a book could be ruined by the
wrong typeface.

Businesses often make the mistake of promoting their products by appealing to
quantifiable measurements. Computer companies do this when they boast about big
hard drives or fast processors. At the end of the day, a person’s experience
using a product is going to trump all the facts and figures. For this reason,
seemingly minor considerations, like how the keys feel when you press them,
have a huge significance.

Another factor that deeply affects a user’s experience is how long a product
lasts before it breaks. This is because people build relationships with their
possessions. Objects give people fond feelings and warm memories in the same
way that friends do. And as with friends, building a relationship with objects
takes time. Some of the most beloved possessions are those that have served a
person for a long time, like a weathered backpack, or a trusty bicycle. 

Ultimately, if a product feels easy and intuitive to use, if it does what it’s
supposed to do, and if it brings joy and can be loved, a business will develop
a more loyal customer base and sell more products in the long-term.

In the next few blinks, we’ll look at some of the techniques that you can use
to optimize the creative process to achieve this.

# We must envision how a product will work in the future before we can create it.

When the comedian Bill Bailey was asked how he comes up with his jokes, he
replied ‘I start with the laugh and work backwards from there.’

Designers have to do something similar. They begin with a vision of the result
and work backwards to figure out what they need to do to make it a reality.

This is especially true when designers are tasked with bringing something into
the world that has never existed before. They must have a clear vision of what
they’re trying to achieve, otherwise, it’s like trying to steer a ship without
a compass.

In developing a vision, it helps to imagine a narrative for a potential
product’s future. Imagine how this new technology might be used, how it might
help people solve problems, and how it might give them joy and delight.

But, don’t stop there. Ask yourself how this technology could change the world.

That’s what the American inventor and early computer pioneer Doug Engelbart,
did when he spearheaded the development of the mouse, hypertext, and
video-conferencing. These technologies transformed how we communicate and
access information. For Engelbart, design was not a question of what technology
to create, but of what world to create. He envisioned a world in which
knowledge could flow to wherever it needed to be.

Sometimes, it’s even necessary to develop new language to express what we’re
trying to achieve. How else could a designer communicate a vision to her team
or to investors if the technology doesn’t exist yet?

This is one contribution that speculative fiction and sci-fi have made to
technological progress. These literary genres have furnished the cultural
imagination with a vision of the future and a vocabulary to talk about it. Take
novelist William Gibson, who coined the word **cyberspace** back in the 1980s.
He’s credited with formulating a vision of virtual reality and hyper-connection
long before the internet became ubiquitous.

It’s through language that we communicate our design vision to other people.
It’s also through language that we communicate enthusiasm to work for a better
future.

As the French writer Saint-Exupéry once put it: if you want a crew to build a
ship, teach them to yearn for the vast and endless sea.

# We can channel inspiration by adopting the right mindset.

It’s no secret that inspiration has a will of its own. It always seems to hit
us at the most awkward possible time, often right when we’re in the middle of
something.

While we can’t control when inspiration decides to visit, there are a few
things we can do to encourage the flow of inspiration and respond to it
effectively when it does arrive.

One practice involves becoming more receptive to beauty. There’s beauty all
around us, but we often don’t recognize it.

In fact, we’re immersed in stimuli all day long. Yet, we block out most of this
information when we focus on our little day-to-day tasks. What if, instead of
glazing over the world, we could throw wide our senses and let in the full
panoply of existence?

This is what the photographer Sebastião Salgado attempts to do in his work.
Salgado is famous for his sprawling vista scenes which he packs with exquisite
detail. He uses a technique in which every point of the picture is in focus. We
need to practice something similar and make time for moments when we take  in
the whole scene at once.

Another technique we should learn to practice is bracketing what we think we
know. Our beliefs about what is and isn’t possible limit us. When we think that
something isn’t possible, we’re defeated from the beginning because we’re not
motivated to overcome the necessary challenges. But, when we bracket our own
presumptions and approach a project with the conviction that it **is**
possible, everything else is just logistics.

Take inspiration from the author Mary Wesley. She didn’t publish a book until
she was 70 years old, but still managed to become one of Britain’s most
successful novelists writing ten best-sellers in the last two decades of her
life. She would never have succeeded had she believed it was not possible to
begin a new career at her age.

Finally, we must be willing to surrender to inspiration when it comes calling.
That might mean dropping what we’re doing and changing plans at the last
minute.

The author did this when he woke up at 5 a.m. one morning to find a thick fog
had descended over the landscape outside his window. In a moment of
inspiration, he rushed from his bed, grabbed his camera which he always kept
loaded with film, and jumped in the car. Driving to a nearby bridge, he
captured a series of photographs that later formed the basis for a solo
exhibition.

“**If you can’t find inspiration in everything, then look again**” – Paul Smith

# It’s okay to borrow design ideas from others.

There’s nothing wrong with taking inspiration from other designers and
companies that are doing things you like – it’s called acknowledging a good
idea when you see it.  

The first step is to identify other businesses that are popular or that impress
you and ask yourself what it is they’re doing right.

It helps to create a stage-by-stage outline of how their business model works
broadly and compare it to your own model. You could also try deconstructing the
business models of several different companies, picking and choosing what you
like, and then putting them back together to create something unique.

It’s also useful to try their services yourself and take notes about your own
experience.

For example, imagine you were going to start a street food operation. What
would your business research involve? Would it involve hard study at the
library? Probably not.

Research doesn’t have to be boring. It could be useful simply to eat at other
food vendors in the area to experience the service they offer and take notes
about what delights or frustrates you about their services.

Of course, most businesses can’t be visited as easily as a food vendor. So, one
thing you could do to take your research further is make contact with the
company to arrange a visit.

You might be surprised how willing many companies are to open their doors to
visitors. Take advantage of the fact that people love to talk about themselves.

The author, for example, was impressed by how the company Yeo Valley Farms
achieved success by transitioning to an organic and co-operative model of
farming. He made a phone call and asked if he could visit, and to his surprise,
they accepted. Before he knew it, he found himself in the south-west of England
receiving a full-day lesson in large-scale organic farming.

On a separate occasion, the author contacted the designer Derek Birdsall whose
work he admired. Derek was so impressed by the author’s attitude that he
decided to take the author under his wing.

You never know where a visit could take you. It’s true what they say: You don’t
get if you don’t ask.

# Openness and collaboration make a powerful design model for a business.

When asked what the shortest poem he had ever written was, Mohammed Ali replied
‘Me, We.’ In two words, Ali captured the connection between the individual and
the collective.

Lately, in the West, we’ve been putting a little too much emphasis on the ‘me’
side of the equation. While it’s true there’s no collective without the
individual contribution of every member, we forget that the individual needs
the collective just as much. Through collaboration, individuals achieve far
more than they ever could do alone.

With this in mind, most businesses could do with a redesign.

Companies that encourage collaboration and communication benefit from enhanced
peer-to-peer learning and a greater flow of ideas.

Take Pixar as an example. After the success of the Pixar team’s debut animated
film **Toy Story**, they decided that if they were going to create truly
exceptional films every time, it would be essential to institute a transparent
and collaborative environment in the workplace. To this end, they established
the **Braintrust**, a regular meeting where Pixar employees could come together
and speak candidly about every aspect of the film-making process from the
script, to design, to production. The meetings would be filled will opinions,
spirited debate, and lots of laughter. Through this process, a film would go
from something mediocre to something outstanding, and as an added benefit, the
company achieved exceptional levels of camaraderie.

For some companies, it might even be beneficial to expand the ethos of
collaboration beyond the limits of the company. That is, some companies could
benefit from an open business model. Being open as a business means consenting
to share technology, research, data, wealth, and resources beyond the company.

Openness is a relatively new design model that presents new organizational and
commercial possibilities for a company.

It’s popular among tech companies that often provide free, open-source versions
of their software online. Open-source software grants users the ability to
analyze a software’s code, modify and contribute to it, and share it with
anyone they please. The company can then decide what it wants to incorporate
into its premium versions. In this way, companies benefit from the talent and
knowledge of the whole user community. With an open model, a business can
innovate its product faster, cheaper, and in more unexpected ways than it could
have done with a closed model.

# We design our lives and our businesses better when we can see the bigger picture.

The biggest threat to the long-term viability of a company is a short-sighted,
profit-focused approach to business.

If you want to design a business that keeps its momentum into the future, then
you need to appreciate how all of its parts are connected. You need to be able
to see the business, its place in the world, and its future in an overview.

To this end, you can learn from a rare human experience called **the overview
effect**, a momentary out-of-body experience where a person ‘sees’ the whole of
reality as a single, unified totality.

It’s an experience that’s said to be common among astronauts, especially when
they gaze upon the earth from space for the first time. Faced with the Earth’s
sublime beauty as it floats in the void, astronauts describe feeling an
overwhelming spiritual connection with the earth, as well as a profound sense
of unity between the cosmos, the earth, and all its inhabitants. We’re all made
of stardust, they say.

When an astronaut experiences the overview effect, it’s usually a profound
life-changing experience. Many astronauts report returning home to Earth with a
newfound purpose in life and a deep conviction that they must contribute to the
future of the earth and the human race.

But, how does this apply to business design?

Gabriel Branby, the CEO of the Swedish axe company Gränsfors Bruk, describes
something similar in his philosophy of **The Total**. He describes how a
shallow, profit-minded approach to business had put the company into financial
arrears when he first bought it. The company had been cutting corners and
pushing its employees hard to produce axes as cheaply as possible. But Branby
changed all that.

As Branby explains, everything is connected: Business, employee satisfaction,
product quality, customer experience, ethics, and the environment. You can’t
focus on one without detriment to the others. That’s the “total” part.

When a company emphasizes the importance of quality in its product, employees
are more satisfied with the work they do and work harder at it. Better quality
products last longer and give more joy to customers who become more loyal to
the company. When products last longer, we take less from the environment and
create less waste.

Ultimately, when a company places quality and beauty at the core of its values,
the result is a beautiful and ethical company that brings joy to others and
success to itself.

# What to read next: The Design of Everyday Things, by Donald A. Norman

Have these blinks sparked a curiosity about design? Then head over to our
blinks to **The Design of Everyday Things** by Donald A. Norman, a classic in
design literature. Whereas we’ve covered a broad notion of design that included
the design of martial arts practices and businesses, these blinks dive deeper
into the design of the objects we use every day and take for granted.

Donald Norman is a professor of cognitive science at the University of
California. He’s built his career in applying insights about human psychology
to the field of design research. He’s an advocate for user-centered design,
calling for design to be more intuitive for the people who use it. 

The blinks begin by discussing some of the psychological barriers to good
design. They then go on to describe practices that designers and companies can
use to overcome these barriers, and in the process, bring technology and humans
closer together.
