# Loserthink

*by Scott Adams*

Source: [https://www.blinkist.com/books/loserthink-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/loserthink-en)

![Loserthink](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5dec10fc6cee0700083c4449/3_4/470.jpg)

Loserthink looks at the various ways in which we fall victim to unproductive
thinking habits. Drawing upon history, psychology, global affairs, and business
to reveal the pitfalls of such habits, these blinks will sharpen your thinking
in an increasingly irrational world.

## Final summary

Loserthink is a trap into which anyone can fall, no matter what its form – from
being seduced by false narratives to trusting unproven clichés. But by being
aware of the common pitfalls of loserthink, we can start to sharpen our
thinking and improve our relationships, careers, and general outlook on life
and the future. 

When you change your perception of the media or learn to use your ego as a
tool, you’ll begin to break out of your individual reality bubble and set the
stage for more rational decisions in every aspect of your life.

## Actionable advice:

**Make a list of your priorities. **

A common loserthink trap is poor judgment regarding personal priorities. Adams
thinks your number one priority should be yourself – when you prioritize
yourself, he says, you’re better equipped to put your energy into helping  your
family, friends, employers, and everyone else around you. An effective way to
do this is by maintaining good health and avoiding stress. If you’re stuck in a
stressful situation – say, a job that you hate – then put yourself first and
get out of it ASAP. You’ll be in a much better position to do right by others
once you do. 

## What’s in it for me? Break out of your mental prison.

Since the advent of smartphone technology and social media, we’ve become
inundated with opinions and ideas that are often biased, manipulative, or
outright absurd. At the same time, the skill we most need for navigating this
jungle, rational thinking, is not something most of us are taught in school. As
a result, even those among us with remarkable intelligence often fail to see
beyond the biases and limits of our individual mindsets.

If you’ve ever **let your ego influence your decisions**, **criticized
someone** without understanding his opinion, or **abandoned a seemingly
overwhelming project**, you might have experienced **loserthink **– a term the
author has coined to describe various kinds of unproductive thinking. Luckily,
with these blinks in hand, you’ll be able to break out of it.

In these blinks, you’ll find out
- how, without any training, the author became a world-renowned cartoonist; 
- the trick hypnotists use to help their patients make drastic life changes;
  and
- why the author believes that climate change isn’t as bad as you might think.

## Think of your ego as a tool rather than your identity.

At some point in your life, you’ve probably found yourself in a room full of
seemingly capable people and felt intimidated. But have you ever considered
that, in these sorts of situations, **everyone** is putting on a performance.
Sure, some people’s performances are close to their true selves. But it’s still
more than likely that they’re amping up their egos for the sake of the public
and hoping that the other people in the room will buy it.

In other words, **even if confidence doesn’t come naturally to you, you can
learn to fake it**. All it takes is thinking of your ego as a tool rather than
an aspect of your identity.

In situations in which an ego will work in your favor, you should dial your ego
up a few notches; thinking of yourself as **more** valuable than your
achievements alone might indicate can improve your romantic, professional,
athletic, and social performance – and that’s not all. Confidence can help you
get hired, since you’ll be more likely to test well under stress.  That’s just
one of many reasons why confident people tend to be more successful, and vice
versa.

One way to project a stronger ego is through your body language. If you have
**good posture, maintain eye contact and take up a lot of space in a room**,
people will see you as confident. When they perceive you that way, they’ll
treat you better, fueling your confidence further.

But not every situation benefits from you turning your ego up; sometimes it
might be in your best interests to dial it **down**. If you let your ego run
wild, you’ll probably be perceived as arrogant. In fact, letting your ego
influence your decisions is a form of loserthink that could cost you your
career. 

When the author, Scott Adams, started the **Dilbert **comic strip in 1989, he
funneled funny ideas from every aspect of his life into the project. But soon,
fans were writing to him and telling him that they enjoyed his office comics
the most. Had he let his ego get in the way, he would have ignored his fans and
continued to build the comic around what he personally found humorous. Instead,
he reshaped **Dilbert **as a workplace comic strip. By letting go of his ego,
he made the comic strip a national sensation, paving the way for his lucrative
career as a cartoonist and entrepreneur.

## Overreliance on history is a sure sign of loserthink.

We often look to the past to find patterns or meaning that might help guide us
in our lives. Yet many of us fall into the trap of relying **too much **on the
past. After all, in many cases, history isn’t necessarily reliable. 

You might be surprised to hear that much of the history you learned in school
isn’t accurate. That’s because there isn’t a single, objective interpretation
of past events – historical accounts often deviate from one another because of
who was writing them. For example, when the author was in school, he learned
that gracious European settlers had allowed Native Americans to live on
reservations for free since the Native Americans were too primitive to
understand the concept of private property.

Obviously, this interpretation of history is a racist one. From the Native
American point of view, a history book would likely say that European
colonialists invaded and stole the land by way of mass genocide. Saying that
accounts of history are subjective is not, of course, the same as claiming that
major historical events like slavery in the United States or World War I and II
didn’t happen. But it’s important to keep in mind that most nations teach their
citizens a version of history that portrays their countries in a positive
light.

Even if textbook history is a distant memory to you, there's a good chance that
you are letting past events determine your decisions. Think of the widely held
idea that history “repeats itself,” which originated with the American
philosopher George Santayana. Following this principle too closely leads to
unproductive thinking. After all, what’s happened in the past is just that
– past!

Adams was hoping that Santayana’s assertion would prove itself true after
publication of his first nonfiction book, **The Dilbert Principle, **which was
a number-one best seller. When his publisher suggested that he take advantage
of the momentum and publish a second book quickly, he eagerly agreed.
Naturally, he was disappointed when that book sold only half as many copies.

As it turns out, most authors with back-to-back best sellers write **fiction,
**capitalizing on a readership that will return to the same writing style again
and again**. **Readers of **nonfiction**, on the other hand, believe that once
they have finished a book, they’ve learned all that the author has to say on
the topic. In other words, in the case of best-selling nonfiction books,
history **cannot** be counted on to repeat itself. 

Adams learned that if he wanted to write another best seller, he would have to
expand to different topics; beyond that, he realized that he should be careful
about letting the past influence his decisions.

## Loserthink can make projects seem impossible, but microsteps make them achievable.

As a trained hypnotist, Adams knows a thing or two about influencing the human
brain. Hypnotists take their patients through a step-by-step process that
begins with small suggestions like, “Your eyelids are getting heavier.” These
prepare the brain for more significant suggestions, like those that help
overcome a phobia. 

But you don’t have to believe in hypnosis for a similar method to be useful in
combating procrastination. When you’re considering a big life change like
applying to grad school, changing your job, or moving to a new city, it’s easy
to get overwhelmed by the size of the project as a whole. But psyching yourself
out like this is another kind of loserthink. To avoid it, try thinking about
productivity in terms of **microsteps**.

These can consist of even the most minute tasks. Say you want to do something
productive, but a demotivating factor like anxiety, the blues, or exhaustion is
preventing you from getting off your couch. To get yourself moving, start with
a microstep –  moving your pinky finger, perhaps. Once you’ve accomplished
that, you’ll find you have a new sense of agency, however small. Riding the
momentum of this feeling, you’ll find it much easier to start moving other
parts of your body and, ultimately, to get up and get going.

Even if your problem is vastly more complex than getting off the couch, you can
still apply the same logic to it – it works for virtually any project. Start by
asking yourself what the smallest step you can take toward achieving your goal
is. Most of the time, you’ll find that completing that small step will set the
rest of the necessary microsteps in motion. 

That’s what happened to Adams when, in 1988, he decided to become a cartoonist.
He’d spent his entire career in the corporate world, and he didn’t know the
first thing about what it would take to become a cartoonist. But instead of
worrying about the whole picture, he simply drove to an art supply store one
day and bought some pens and paper.

Later that week, he tested his drawing materials. He then decided to start
getting up half an hour earlier every day to practice drawing before he left
for work. Though what he accomplished each day might have seemed insignificant,
his work paid off a year later when his now critically acclaimed comic strip
**Dilbert** began to run in newspapers nationwide.

> “Loserthink involves imagining the entire task ahead and letting it stun you into inaction.”

## Ask for clarification before criticizing someone based on what you think she meant.

Have you ever said something that someone else misinterpreted?  As a public
figure with a large following on Twitter, Adams experiences this on a daily
basis. Among other things, he’s been called a racist, a liar, and a neo-Nazi
supporter. He’s also been criticized for his ardent support of President Trump.

But before you blame this on social media, consider his point of view on the
press, too – as a person who’s experienced fame, he says he’s well-acquainted
with the fourth estate’s tendency to misinterpret the truth most of the time.
He says that less than ten percent of his critics, both professional and
otherwise, accurately interpret his personal thoughts or opinions. That’s
because, while many people believe they’re good at guessing others’ thoughts,
no one is capable of mind reading.

**Believing that you know a stranger’s true motivations** is yet another form
of loserthink. Labeling someone a socialist on Twitter because they advocate
for publicly funded health insurance, for example, isn’t just bad manners; it
might also not reflect their actual point of view.

To combat this form of loserthink, the author suggests **waiting 48 hours to
see whether an update, clarification, or apology follows a public statement
that offends you**. Only after that 48 hours is up should you react, and if the
speaker or writer **does** clarify her statement, you can accept her
clarification and move on. After all, that’s the polite thing to do.

The author got the idea for this forty-eight-hour rule in 2018, when the
American actress and comedian Roseanne Barr tweeted that Valerie Jarrett,
former advisor to President Obama, looked like the offspring of a **Planet of
the Apes **character and the Muslim Brotherhood. Jarrett is part
African-American and was born in Iran, and to many, Barr’s use of specific
racial stereotypes seemed clear and intentional. Barr pushed back, claiming
that she hadn't been aware of Jarret's background.  Nonetheless, she was
immediately labeled a racist, which ruined her career.

Had critics used the forty-eight-hour rule and asked Barr for further
clarification, it’s possible that they would have given credence to Barr’s
claims of ignorance – claims Adams himself believes. In his view, Barr surely
wouldn’t have been stupid enough to compare an African-American to an ape even
if she **were** a racist.

Even if you aren’t famous, you might agree with Adams that what counts most
about a person is what **they say **they mean rather than what **you think**
they mean. In Adam’s view, even if a person is a racist at heart, her actions
are what matter at the end of the day. So next time you’re unsure about an
offensive statement, ask for clarification before you lash out.

## The future isn’t as bad as you might think.

If you’re like most people, never-ending gloom-and-doom predictions about the
future have left you, at the very least, concerned. Between climate change,
unemployment, and the healthcare crisis, our current media climate has created
a constant state of anxiety.

However, the author believes that things are often better than news outlets
would like us to think. Take unemployment. Though many futurists have
speculated that robots will increasingly displace low-skilled workers, new
economic and technological developments suggest that we might be approaching
the **end** of unemployment.

One way this might play out is in lower living costs. As soon as an energy
alternative such as fusion energy or Gen IV nuclear power becomes available,
energy costs could decrease dramatically. Self-driving cars and improvements in
ride-sharing apps will lead to lower costs for both transportation and
insurance. And the rise of online learning will decrease the cost of educating
workers, making it easier to train the unemployed.

But technology won’t stop there; there are also technologies in the pipeline
that might help alleviate the effects of climate change. Take air conditioning
– a technology that will be increasingly critical as the planet warms. British
business magnate Richard Branson has collaborated with the Indian government to
offer $3 million to anyone who can come up with an effective form of
air-conditioning that everyone can afford.  If a winning idea emerges, this
initiative will mean that fewer people will suffer as temperatures rise in the
long term.

Another technology that could ease climate change is CO₂ scrubbing. Carbon
Engineering, a Canadian company, partially funded by Bill Gates, is currently
developing a technology that converts CO₂ from the atmosphere into jet fuel for
planes.  According to the company, tests have been successful and the process
is already cheap enough to be economically viable. 

Finally, when it comes to health care, innovations such as smartphone health
tests and **telemedicine** – virtual doctors’ appointments using email or video
calling – will make healthcare more affordable for people who can’t afford
insurance.

With these hopeful technologies in mind, remember that there are two sides to
this story of a dark future – and that that’s true of every story. The next
time you scroll through social media, remember that the stories you see there
are designed to make people angry and maximize clicks. So before you hit a link
and start to cement your own opinion, avoid loserthink by doing your own
research.

## What to read next: How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big by Scott Adams.

As you’ve just learned, **Dilbert **creator Scott Adams became a cartoonist
with no formal training by simply taking one small step at a time. But that’s
not the only method Adams used  – the tricks behind his spectacular success as
a cartoonist and businessman are further detailed in **How to Fail at Almost
Everything and Still Win Big.**

Adams spells out the life and career advice that guided him toward success. For
Adams, success didn’t come despite his failures; it came because of them. To
find out how he sustained high energy levels to fuel his quest for constant
self-improvement, head over to our blinks for **How to Fail at Almost
Everything and Still Win Big.**
