# How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big by Scott Adams

Source: [How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big by Scott Adams](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/how-to-fail-at-almost-everything-and-still-win-big-en/)

![How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5ade2f0ab238e10007596e8e/1_1/470.jpg)

How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big (2013) is a grab bag of life
and career advice from the creator of Dilbert, the popular comic strip. Scott
Adams explains how he succeeded as a cartoonist and businessman, not despite
his failures, but because of them. He also shares his secrets for maintaining
high energy levels and using them to fuel a life of constant learning and
improvement.

## Final summary

The path to success isn’t necessarily straight and narrow. 

Instead of setting goals, you should use systems, take chances and explore many
different options.

This will give you the opportunity to learn from your failures and develop a
broad range of skills. 

Once you figure out what your special skills are, manage your energy levels
with a healthy diet and exercise, and surround yourself with creative,
supportive people who inspire you.

## Actionable advice:

**Study the systems and methods of successful people.**

What did Steve Jobs do that made him successful? The author encourages
researching what successful people in your area of work do and what types of
systems they use. Then, test out what they’ve done and combine it with what
works for you.

## What’s in it for me? Learn that the path to success is paved with failure.

Do you sometimes regret that you didn’t take your parents’ advice and become a
doctor or a lawyer or a banker? Are you tired of moving from job to job and
never finding the right fit? Or maybe you’re filled with great ideas, but none
of them have really come to anything?

Well, then you’ve got a thing or two to learn from Scott Adams, famous
cartoonist and chronic failure. Before creating *Dilbert*, his hugely
successful comic strip, Adams failed way more often than he succeeded: he got
fired countless times, started a business that quickly went under and created a
bunch of unsuccessful patents.

But he used all this unsuccess as material for his comics and, in the end, came
out on top. If you take a page from his book, you may find that your failures
are merely the cobblestones on the path to success.

In these blinks, you’ll also learn
- why you shouldn’t be a specialist;
- what the author named his failed burrito chain; and
- about the benefits of delusions.

## Create systems instead of setting goals.

Walk into a bookstore, find the self-help section and flip open a book. Nine
times out of ten, you’ll encounter page upon page of upbeat prose extolling the
life-changing benefits of setting clear goals.

But this praise is slightly misplaced, because goals, no matter how clear, have
two problems: they’re future-oriented, and they’re overly specific.

Let’s start with the temporal trouble. All goals are situated in the future,
but in order to achieve them, you must do work in the present. And when you
begin working toward a goal, you usually won’t see immediate results. This can
be frustrating and discouraging.

That’s why the author prefers *systems*, which are firmly grounded in the
present. Unlike goals, systems are focused on the here and now and can be
worked into your daily life, meaning that you can get daily pleasure from
successfully operating them.

Adams learned about systems by chance. On a flight, he was once seated next to
a man who explained how systems had transformed him from an employee to a CEO.
His system was simple: keep moving from job to job, always looking for
something better. Even though he didn't have a clear end-goal in mind, this
system allowed him to accumulate so much know-how that he ended up in the CEO’s
chair.

Systems also trump goals because they’re nonspecific.

The specificity of goals often creates an illusion of failure. People tend to
feel that, if they don’t accomplish exactly what they set out to do, they
haven’t accomplished *anything*.

For instance, say you want to lose 20 pounds before Valentine’s Day. This is a
laudable goal, but it’s got some inherent issues. First, you’ll only get to
celebrate when you achieve it; and second, if you fall one pound short, you’ve
failed.

It’d be wiser to set up a system – say, to commit to exercising every day,
whether for five minutes or half an hour. This way, you’ll establish a habit
and have an easier time staying motivated.

This is what the author did as a young man. Whether writing or drawing or
whatever it might have been, he’d create a system to produce and replicate
material that people were receptive to, without a clear end-goal in mind.

And this was a clever move. Considering the number of jobs and projects he
abandoned before creating his hit comic strip *Dilbert*, he probably would have
felt like a total failure had he set his sights on one particular goal.

> But being system oriented, I felt myself growing more capable every day, no
> matter the fate of the project I happened to be working on.”

## It’s better to develop a variety of abilities and sometimes fail than master a single skill.

In the business world of the past, specialization was crucial. Today, however,
possessing general knowledge about a variety of fields is often better than
knowing everything about one.

Far from making you mediocre, having many skills actually increases your market
value.

Adams is a generalist if ever there was one. When he started *Dilbert*, he
couldn’t write, draw or conduct business at a truly top-notch level. Rather, he
was relatively good at each skill, a general competence that, he believes, led
to his comic’s success.

Possessing a broad range of skills will help you adapt to the world’s constant
changes, and it also comes with the added benefit of making you stand out from
the competition.

Of course, some skills will be more useful than others, so it’s wise to take
your location into account.

For instance, if you live in California, you’ll have an easier time landing a
job if you can speak both Spanish and English.

But there are some skills that’ll come in handy no matter where you are, such
as grammar, vocal techniques, technological fluency and the ability to maintain
a lively conversation.

And here’s another great thing about trying to gain a range of skills: you’ll
experience failure.

Failing is often the last thing people want to do, but **each failure offers an
opportunity to learn**. Let’s say you’re an aspiring author, and you’ve just
published your debut novel. You’re eagerly awaiting notice from the critics,
but when the reviews start to appear, they’re all *horrible*. Well, rather than
despairing, keep the criticism in mind when writing your next novel. Let the
failure help you.

The author failed countless times before creating *Dilbert*: he got fired from
Pacific Bell phone company; his ideas for computer games and patents came to
nothing; he created a burrito chain called Dilberito, and it tanked.

But he didn’t sink into a slump of dejection. He took this experience – and the
knowledge it provided him about business and marketing – and used it to shape
his hit comic.

## Identify your special skills and produce great work by combining them effectively.

Most of us have experienced parental pressure to pursue a certain career. You
should be a doctor! Or a lawyer! Or one of those super successful Silicon
Valley tech people!

But here’s the thing: you’re the only one who should decide what you want to
do. And if that seems like a tall order, you should engage in a little
old-fashioned introspection and identify your *special skills*.

How will you know what these are?

Well, what are you interested in? The things we like to do are usually the
things we’re good at. For instance, if you’re comfortable around kids and like
spending time with them, then your special skill might be working with
children.

Or were you obsessed with a certain subject or hobby as a child? Such childhood
infatuations often end up being one’s special skill.

If you’re still uncertain, then consider the areas in life where you’ve always
been comfortable taking risks.

Maybe you’ve never had a problem speaking or performing in front of crowds;
this might indicate that your special skill is entertainment.

As a child, Scott Adams loved to draw comics. He was obsessed with it and was
always taking risks – for instance, drawing humorous comics in class which, if
discovered by a teacher, would have gotten him in trouble.

But even if your special skill is as apparent as the author’s, you may not have
an easy time selecting a career. Finding the right job requires *sampling* –
that is, trying out different things until you find work that is both enjoyable
and makes use of your special skills.

And who knows – for you, that might mean starting a business of your own and
shunning the nine-to-five life.

If that’s the case, and you do try to monetize your own product or idea, you
should try to find its *x-factor*. This quality is hard to define exactly but
it’s the part of your idea or product that generates consumer excitement,
causing them to share it on social media or by word of mouth – and it’s the
thing you should concentrate most on developing. For instance, despite being
bulky and a bit confusing, the first iPhone clearly hit upon an x-factor:
people couldn’t stop talking about it!

## Find energizing activities, determine when you’re at your best and never work where you relax.

Have you ever tried to go for a run even though you felt drained and
unmotivated? Or forced yourself to eat some food even though you weren’t
hungry? If you’ve done something like this, it’s probably because, instead of
following your personal bodily rhythms, you were adhering to a schedule
established by someone else.

And this is never a good idea; it’s always best to heed your natural rhythms
and energy levels.

When do you feel most creative? When do you feel most energetic? Whether it’s
at 8 a.m. or 8 p.m., figure out when you feel most able to engage in specific
activities, be they mental, physical or utterly mundane. This will keep you
energized and help you make the best of your time.

It’s also a good idea to pay attention to location. For instance, if you like
to relax on the couch, you might want to avoid working there. Same goes for
your bed, which should be reserved for sleeping. Don’t make peaceful locations
into places of work.

Another good way to optimize your energy is to identify which tasks drain you
and which you find energizing.

The author likes to think of himself as a “soft robot,” with particular
programming, as opposed to a spontaneous, mysterious being. If you think this
way, you can take advantage of your own special programming, and hack the
energy levels that are “softwired” into you.

For instance, you might derive energy and focus from straightening up the
living room. Or, if tidying up is a draining activity for you, try different
things to figure out what activities do give you energy.

The author’s energizing activity turned out to be blogging, which adds an extra
jolt of stimulation to his day. In contrast, shopping is something that totally
drains him, and he avoids it as much as possible.

Location and energy are crucial – but without good health, you’ll have trouble
focusing, no matter what you do or where you do it. And that’s what we’ll
discuss next.

> “No matter what you want to do in life, higher energy will help you get there.”

## Improve your energy and mood with diet and exercise.

If you’ve ever embarked on a new diet or a rigorous exercise regimen, then you
know how hard it can be to stick to a virtuous routine. So how do you stay
consistent and maintain healthy habits?

Let’s start with some dietary tips.

Remember, your mood is ruled by food, so you should stay smart about what you
put on your plate.

Certain foods, like certain activities, are energizing, while others are
draining. The author calls this the *food-is-mood hypothesis*, and he advises
paying attention to which foods give you an extra boost and which simply make
you feel slow. Processed carbs, for instance, make lots of people feel
lethargic and tired.

But if you’re struggling to replace trashy-but-delicious junk food with
healthy-but-bland forms of nourishment, such as vegetables and grains, then
take a tip from Adams and spice things up with nutritious additions.

For instance, put butter and pepper on otherwise unexciting steamed broccoli.
Other flavorful add-ons include honey, lemon, soy sauce, cheese, various
dressings and, of course, salt.

Exercise is as healthy and natural a mood booster as food, so be sure to make
it part of your daily routine.

Sure, we’re all busy, and fitness can often seem like a low priority. But the
benefits to your mood and energy are well worth the scheduling headache.

If you’re having trouble sticking to a particular regimen, try joining a group
that meets consistently every week. This will hold you accountable and make it
harder for you to simply give up.

For instance, the author’s wife plays tennis every Thursday, and since people
expect her to show up, she can’t just bail. Meanwhile, Adams works out at 12:40
on Tuesdays, which, for him, is the perfect time.

Now, in the author’s view, people are a bit like dogs – they strive for rewards
and try to avoid punishment. So, whenever you complete a successful workout,
give yourself a reward, be it a healthy snack or a tiny indulgence.The author’s
reward of choice is a nice cup of coffee.

## Use associate energy and delusions for your motivation and gain.

Moods are infectious. Maybe you’ve had your day thrown off by the grumpiness of
a coworker. Or perhaps the opposite has happened, and you’ve found yourself
grinning after being smiled at by a stranger.

This infectiousness is known as *associate energy*, so named because it refers
to the energy you get – or are drained of – by associating with others.

So how can you use this energy?

Well, it’s really quite straightforward: you should associate with the people
you want to be like.

One of the author’s friends took this injunction very seriously. He once told
the author that he wanted to live in an affluent neighborhood so that he
himself would become affluent. Naturally, Adams thought this was ridiculous –
but then, later, he read an article about how spending time with overweight
friends can lead to you gaining weight as well.

He then began noticing this effect in his own life; whenever he was in great
physical condition, he noticed that his friends usually were, too.

Prior to his writing *Dilbert*, he worked with three aspiring writers, and he
now wonders whether he was influenced by the associate energy and if that’s why
he got inspired to write his comic.

Maybe he’s being delusional, but that hardly matters, since delusions can be
extremely useful.

If they’re not doing any harm, there’s no reason not to entertain certain
delusions. Plenty of performers and athletes engage in harmless delusional
behavior: they keep lucky coins in their pockets, for instance, or wear special
socks.

Even the author indulges a delusion: he uses affirmations. It’s of little
importance that there’s no scientific evidence to support the effectiveness of
affirmations; they work for the author and keep him concentrated on his
priorities.

Don’t believe it? Before he created *Dilbert*, he used to recite a specific
affirmation every day: “I, Scott Adams, will be a famous cartoonist.”

## Suggested further reading: Big Weed by Christian Hageseth

*Big Weed* (2015) is a first-person account of entrepreneur Christian
Hageseth’s success in the evolving business of legal marijuana. He reveals all
the essentials you need to know about a future in this new market, and explains
a bit about the basics of marijuana that any budding entrepreneur should know.

