# The Long View

*by Brian Fetherstonhaugh*

Source: [https://www.blinkist.com/books/the-long-view-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/the-long-view-en)

![The Long View](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/59b8474db238e10005c1fb21/3_4/470.jpg)

A solid guide to building a lasting and meaningful career. Put yourself on the
right path by assembling a useful skill set, developing a dynamite personal
network and, most importantly, finding a good work-life balance. Work doesn’t
have to be miserable and it’s not too late to find a career that can be both
emotionally and financially rewarding.

# What’s in it for me? Learn how to plan for a long and successful career.

If you ran a marathon, how would you pace yourself? Well, provided that you
hope to cross the finish line before collapsing from exhaustion, you would
start out at a moderate speed and save some energy to give your all on the home
stretch.

A marathon is a long and demanding challenge, which may make you want to avoid
it in the first place. What you may not realize, however, is that you have a
marathon lying ahead of you – or perhaps you’re already running it now. This
marathon is your career journey, and you may well be going at the wrong speed.

These blinks will remind you how long a typical career path is. You will learn
about the different stages of your career and which strategy you should apply
in each of the stages. Find out how to develop your skills and see what it
takes to succeed in the rapidly changing working world of today.

You’ll also learn
- at what age you’ll make most of your wealth;
- the point at which you do not need to work on your weaknesses anymore; and
- what you owe the younger generation when you retire.

#  Job expectations are changing, so we need to rethink how we build our careers.

When you think of your dream job, what do you see? How important is it that
your work is appreciated and rewarded? Do you want to be able to learn, have
fun and grow as you go along?

These are the kind of questions that The Futures Company asked in 2015 when
they tried to get to the bottom of what Americans consider a fulfilling career
today.

What they found was that people want a combination of financial success and
happiness.

Their poll found that 70 percent of people will choose happiness over financial
perks when making career decisions; at the same time, however, 86 percent chose
money as the most important factor overall.

This tells us that financial success is important, but ideally, this money
won’t come at the expense of happiness or a healthy work-life balance.

As a result, we are seeing an increase in flexible work schedules, with more
part-time roles, as well as freelance jobs, work-from-home opportunities and
job-sharing offers. All of these are now viable alternatives to the traditional
nine-to-five job.

So the question now becomes: how can I put together the right strategy to build
a flexible, fulfilling and balanced career?

The answer to this lies in taking all the aspects of your life into
consideration and emerging with a path that allows you to be successful without
sacrificing important things like family, friends and health.

After all, as career and motivation experts like Dan Pink and Tom Rath point
out, a happy work life directly translates into higher productivity, better
health and increased satisfaction.

In the blinks that follow, we’ll take a closer look at the tools we need to
create a healthy work-life balance and still have a successful career.

# We need a new career model that is built around long-term success.

Would you rather be given a dollar today or be able to save two dollars next
month? Many of us would choose the first option, and we tend to make similar
choices when it comes to our career by focusing on immediate rewards over
long-term success.

However, if you are serious about securing a fulfilling career, you’ll
eventually need to look at things from a long-term perspective.

After all, a career path covers a very long period of time, and the average US
employee will spend more than 100,000 hours at work. This is more time than
we’ll spend sleeping, and even when we’re not at work, we’re often thinking or
worrying about it.

But most people come at their careers from the wrong angle by only considering
how to succeed as quickly as possible, rather than planning things out for the
long term.

There’s a saying that your career should be thought of as a marathon, not a
sprint. And every marathon runner knows that they can’t start off running at
full speed, or else they’ll never make it to the finish line.

Much the same way, it’s important to consider that the average retirement age
is 65, so you need to have the right mindset for planning that far ahead. This
implies keeping important aspects in mind, such as your education, networking
and your and your family’s happiness.

Accumulating wealth is important, but keep in mind that most of this happens
later in life.

According to the Survey of Consumer Finances, 85 to 90 percent of your personal
wealth will likely be accumulated after your fortieth birthday.

Until then, it’s best to take your time and figure out what you really like
doing and how you can become an expert in your field. This way, you won’t be
stuck doing something you hate for the next 45 years.

# Prepare for a lasting career with a varied skill set and experiences.

There’s an old adage that says good things come in threes, and this applies to
the three best ways you can spend your time in order to help create
opportunities at any stage in your career.

These three pillars are** transferable skills**, **meaningful experiences** and
**enduring relationships.**

So, let’s begin with the first of these and start building a useful skill set.

To understand how important your skills are, picture being 40 years old, losing
your job and being forced to start all over again on your own. For this
scenario to work out, you’ll need a strong set of talents, which is why you
should spend your twenties and thirties gaining skills.

Now, the best ones to have are transferable skills, which can be applied to a
variety of different jobs. You can get these by picking up academic degrees,
foreign languages and computer skills, as well as more personal characteristics
like communication skills and emotional intelligence.

Having strong and persuasive communication skills is an excellent trait for any
job, whether you’re in sales or a political activist trying to win people over.
No matter what, this is an essential skill for success.

These are especially important nowadays since the modern job market is
unpredictable and constantly changing, so having transferable talents gives you
a clear advantage.

Now, while you’re collecting skills, you should also be working in different
environments in order to build meaningful experiences.

People who spend their career in one environment probably know how to do one
thing efficiently but get overwhelmed when confronted with something out of the
ordinary.

With a diverse job history, you’ll improve your decision-making skills by
picking up different perspectives, which will make you more appealing to
potential employers.

So take chances and move from a corporate environment into an entrepreneurial
one that might provide the opportunity to launch a new brand from the ground
up. Or perhaps work abroad for a while. Either way, don’t be afraid to fail, as
failure also comes with important lessons.

Next up, we’ll look at enduring relationships.

# Strong contacts are valuable to a successful career.

Now, let’s look at that third category of time well spent: **enduring
relationships**.

Whether you know it or not, work relationships offer the biggest source of
support for your career, because no matter what field you’re in, the smartest
and most successful people all got there with advice from others.

The best relationships you can form all fall into one of four levels:

The first level is your basic **contacts**, which covers everyone who’s ever
entered your life.

These are unfiltered connections that include all your social network
platforms, including e-mail, LinkedIn and Facebook contacts, as well as Twitter
and Instagram followers.

These might not be the strongest connections, but they’re useful for sharing a
message, such as the launch of a new product, with as many people as possible.

However, if you want one of these contacts to take action on your behalf,
you’ll have to raise them to one of the following levels.

The second level contains the **experts**, who are people that carry specific
knowledge and have access to certain information that could one day be the
solution to a major problem. It’s important to maintain a good relationship
here, which you can do by readily offering them your own expertise.

At the third level are the** critical colleagues**, which include your boss and
other people who have the most impact on your career success. They might be the
deciding factor in promotions and pay raises, and are largely responsible for
your general happiness at work.

Finally, the fourth level contains the** champions**, such as your mentors and
the small number of people who are there to offer support and advice. These
might include a former professor or colleague who can provide a good reference
for you. Naturally, these are people who should receive regular appreciation
and goodwill.

Now that you have them in order, it’s good to regularly check in and identify
your key contacts. And it’s always good to spend the most time with those who
make you feel intelligent, stronger and more able to conquer your career goals.

# Your first career stage is about self-improvement and making connections. 

Careers last an average of 45 years, which is such a long time that it can be
helpful to think of it in three separate stages, each of them lasting for about
15 years.

The first stage is all about getting yourself in the game, so this includes
putting together a plan for your job search and building connections to land
that first gig.

Creating a spreadsheet can be useful, as you can fill in the first column with
around 20 different companies that you would be interested in working for.
Then, start researching these businesses and try to find contacts that can help
you get your foot in the door.

LinkedIn can be a good tool for establishing these contacts, as can your alumni
network, which might contain someone who works at one of these companies.

Once you find a connection, send a short e-mail, along with your resume, to see
if they’d be willing to spend 15 to 20 minutes talking about their job.

A short phone call will give you the chance to find out what skills the company
is looking for, what the company culture is like and what your contact likes
and dislikes about the job.

In job hunting, having a connection within the company always provides a huge
advantage and increases your chances of getting that first interview and
landing the job.

This first stage is also a time to discover what you are good at and improving
these skills.

Discovering what you are good at can be as simple as creating a list of what
you enjoy and don’t enjoy doing.

No matter what, the 15 years of the first stage in your career should always be
about finding ways to continue accumulating knowledge, better understand your
strengths and overcome your weaknesses.

Everyone has weaknesses, such as public speaking, for instance, which can be
improved by taking a class to learn different tips and tricks for making
yourself comfortable in front of others.

The main goal here is to lay a solid foundation to build upon during the next
two stages.

**”The whole first stage – often up to 15 years – is a process of learning and discovery, of trial and error.”**

# The second stage of a career is the time to find your sweet spot and build a solid team.

Just as stage one is about finding what you’re good at, stage two is about
becoming an expert at it by building upon your core strengths and making sure
you stand out from the rest.

A great way to set yourself apart is to find your “sweet spot,” which is the
intersection between what you are good at, what you love doing and which
service you can provide the world.

So, if you are a talented communicator, you might focus your time and energy on
building a reputation as being the best public speaker in your company.

Or, if you are a creative genius, work at becoming the company’s visionary and
go-to person for innovative ideas. Whatever it is that you’re good at,
highlight it and make sure others recognize it as well.

During this second 15-year stage in your career, you should be familiar with
your weaknesses as well as your strengths. You can use this information to your
advantage by building a strong team that contains people with skills that
complement one another.

No one is perfect, so use this time to surround yourself with teammates that
can compensate for the areas that aren’t your strongest.

Maybe those public speaking classes still didn’t make you a master of
delivering a sales pitch to potential investors – so keep an eye out for the
person that is great at selling ideas and winning people over.

During the second stage, you can put together all the pieces you need to sell
your expertise as something that could benefit any company. In the next and
final blink, we’ll find out how everything comes together in the third stage.

# The third stage of a career is about planning the best ways for you to pass along your knowledge.

Remarkably, the average life expectancy for those in first-world countries has
grown by 30 years over the past century, which means a person’s career can last
longer than it ever has before.

But there are still preparations that need to be made, which is why the third
stage of your career is all about setting the stage to pass your expertise on
to the next generation.

For many people, work provides a purpose and motivation to get up in the
morning, while also being a source of satisfaction. As such, reaching
retirement age isn’t everyone’s idea of a blessing.

But if you plan ahead, you can still pass the torch on to others and maintain a
sense of contribution and value.

**Succession **is one of the most popular ways to go about this, as it ensures
your company is prepared and can seamlessly transition from one leader to the
next.

The formal way to set up a succession is to write everything out in documents
that detail all your responsibilities, contacts, ongoing projects and the
long-term goals you have for the company.

Another way is to have internal training and mentoring sessions at the company
to share your knowledge and all the best practices that you’ve developed over
the years. These sessions can even be recorded and stored using programs like
Google Hangouts.

Depending on your area and depth of knowledge, your third stage could include
time spent teaching a college course or perhaps offering classes in your
neighborhood to help people of all ages learn a new skill.

But just because this is the final stage in your career, it doesn’t mean you
should stop learning.

Things are changing quickly, especially in the business world, and it’s
important to stay up-to-date on all the latest developments if your expertise
is going to stay relevant. If you work in marketing, you can’t ignore emerging
topics like e-commerce and marketing automation.

So, use your mentoring sessions with the younger generation to both pass on
knowledge and stay informed on current topics. This way, the final stage of
your career can be one of respect and personal accomplishment.

# Final summary

We often underestimate how long a career is and miss out on the big picture by
focusing on short-term successes. We can fix this short-sightedness by
recognizing the long journey that constitutes a successful career and equipping
ourselves with the right skills and relevant experiences to attain long-term
satisfaction. 

## Actionable Advice Ask your boss and colleagues for feedback.

If your company doesn’t offer any performance reviews, you might want to speak
with your boss and suggest that these start taking place on a regular basis.
Receiving feedback from your superiors and peers is a great way to learn about
your strengths and weaknesses, which, in turn, will help you improve your
performance.

## Suggested further reading: How Will You Measure Your Life? by Clayton M. Christensen, James Allworth and Karen Dillon

Author Clayton M. Christensen is an expert in business innovation. Having spent
years working alongside high achievers and in successful enterprises, some of
which he founded himself, he came to realize that a measure of a person’s life
needs to be more than time spent at the office.

 

 
