# Search Inside Yourself

*by Chade-Meng Tan*

Source: [https://www.blinkist.com/books/search-inside-yourself-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/search-inside-yourself-en)

![Search Inside Yourself](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5a65b8adb238e10007b0ca10/1_1/470.jpg)

(2012) teaches how the power of emotional intelligence and mindfulness can be
harnessed to thrive both personally and professionally. Tan’s teachings are
based on years of research and afford you the opportunity to improve your
happiness, creativity and productivity.

# The key message in this book:

We all have the ability to improve our lives, and this improvement can be
achieved through concentration, mental clarity, creativity and empathy. By
using prescribed practices and exercises, we can all become better public
speakers, more optimistic humans, calmer partners and abler employees.

# Actionable advice

**A body-scan exercise can help you focus and relax**

Start by finding a comfortable position to sit in and spend two minutes
breathing, with your eyes closed. Then go through each part of your body, one
by one, really focusing on the sensations you find on your head, face, neck,
back, front and shoulders. Can you also feel an emotion in your body? Next,
bring to mind a positive emotion by recalling a pleasant event. Then try to
locate where in the body you feel it. Finally, spend two minutes breathing
naturally and come back to the present moment.

Body scanning is valuable as it allows you to focus on your physical sensations
much more than in everyday life, and it also relaxes you, which can help you
fall asleep.

# What’s in it for me? Understand the emotions of yourself and others.

Most of us strive to get a good education, thinking that it’s the only way to
land a well-paying job. But one of the most important determinants of
professional success is actually emotional intelligence, which you can learn
outside of school.

These blinks will show you how to increase your emotional intelligence and
guide you through the steps to becoming a better leader, coworker or partner.
They will also reveal how mindfulness can improve your happiness.

The basic principle behind the methodology is a three-step approach: You must
first develop your capacity to direct your attention as you see fit, and here
mindfulness meditation is very useful. With this improved attention, you can
get a better understanding of your own cognitive and emotional processes,
increasing your self-knowledge. Finally, building on this foundation, you can
establish good mental habits for yourself that will increase your happiness and
effectiveness.

In these blinks, you’ll discover
- the different types of emotional intelligence;
- how meditation benefits your happiness; and
- that empathy can save your relationships.

# Emotional intelligence is one of many different types of intelligence.

What does intelligence mean to you? A high IQ? Brilliant linguistic skills?
What about musical abilities?

Howard Gardner, a developmental psychologist at Harvard, was the first to
propose a theory of multiple intelligences. He argued that a child who lacked
skills in math, but showed talent in languages or the arts, for example, should
still be considered intelligent.

To illustrate his argument, Gardner came up with a list of different types of
intelligence, which includes among other items **intrapersonal intelligence
**and **interpersonal intelligence**. Having intrapersonal intelligence means
being aware of your own inner feelings, values and goals. Interpersonal
intelligence, on the other hand, involves awareness of the feelings, emotions
and motivations of others.

Intrapersonal and interpersonal intelligence come together to form **emotional
intelligence**, which is the ability to understand the feelings and emotions of
yourself and others **and **the ability to use that knowledge to guide your
actions and thoughts.

The author of the book **Emotional Intelligence**, Daniel Goleman, grouped
emotional intelligence into five categories:

- **Self-awareness** is your knowledge about your internal state and about your
  preferences, resources and intuition.
- **Self-regulation** is the ability to control your impulses, resources and
  state of mind.
- **Motivation** is the emotional ability to steer yourself toward your goals.
- **Empathy** is your awareness of others’ feelings, needs and concerns.
- And the final category is **social skills**: your ability to influence
  others.

So what are the benefits of emotional intelligence?

Well, let’s take a look at Bill Duane, an engineering manager, and how he used
emotional-intelligence training to improve his life.

Through emotional-intelligence training, Duane realized that he needed more
time for himself and reduced his workdays to four a week. With one less day of
work, he found the time to focus more on his well-being, and became motivated
to accomplish more while doing less. He became a better listener, learned how
to regulate his temper and to understand situations from different
perspectives. As a result, Duane became a more effective manager, not only
improving his life, but also the lives of those who worked for him.

So now you know what emotional intelligence is. Let’s press on to see exactly
how useful it can be in your day-to-day life.

# With practice, emotional intelligence can drastically improve your work performance.

Now that you know what emotional intelligence is, the next step is to learn how
it can help you – and how it can be improved.

One advantage of developing your emotional intelligence is that it can lead to
better work performance. For example, a higher level of motivation – one of the
five categories of emotional intelligence – increases optimism, which in turn
will improve your performance at work, as shown by a study conducted in the
1980s by American psychologist Martin Seligman. He found that, in their first
year of sales, optimistic insurance agents outperformed their pessimistic
colleagues by 8 percent and by 31 percent the following year. The study
demonstrates that emotional competencies such as optimism can have a
considerable effect on employee performance.

Understanding and possessing emotional intelligence can also make you a better
leader.

A good example is the CEO of Delta Airlines, Gerald Grinstein, who was faced
with the difficult task of cutting costs at work. Grinstein was tough, but due
to his interpersonal skills, he was able to keep the loyalty and motivation of
his employees high through this difficult period. He understood the importance
of creating a positive working environment, restoring effective communication
and building trust.

But if you don’t naturally possess high emotional intelligence like Grinstein,
don’t fret – those with low emotional intelligence can learn to improve it.

Ebenezer Scrooge from Charles Dickens’ **A Christmas Carol** is a case in
point. In the beginning, Scrooge demonstrates very low levels of intrapersonal
emotional intelligence, and, despite his wealth, he is unable to feel happy. As
you likely recall, Scrooge is visited by three ghosts, who each seek to
counteract his poor self-awareness. In the end, by coming to terms with his
thoughts and actions, Scrooge succeeds in improving his emotional intelligence.

You, too, can improve your emotional intelligence – even without the help of
supernatural visitors. So let’s look at some real-world techniques on how you
can achieve that.

# Meditation improves concentration, relaxation and alertness, and it makes us happier.

Meditation might seem like something magical, but it’s really nothing more than
a mental workout. Just as the many training machines at the gym are designed to
exercise different muscles, so different types of meditation are designed to
exercise different parts of your mind.

The best mental training for developing emotional intelligence is called
**mindful meditation**, or just **mindfulness**. It improves our concentration
by training both our **attention** and **meta attention**.

Attention, as defined by the late nineteenth-century psychologist William
James, is “taking possession by the mind, in clear and vivid form.”

Conversely, meta attention is “attention of attention.” It’s your ability to
realize when you’re paying attention, or when your attention has wavered.

To demonstrate this, imagine riding a bicycle. When cycling, you maintain your
balance with lots of **micro-recoveries**. If the bike leans one way, you
adjust yourself to the other side, and vice versa. Performing these
micro-recoveries keeps you upright and balanced, creating the sensation of a
smooth ride.

The same goes for attention. When your meta attention is trained well, you can
perform a micro-recovery every time you begin to lose focus, bringing your
attention back to the task at hand. Doing this often enough will lead to long
periods of deep concentration.

In addition to affording you better concentration, mindfulness also clears your
head and helps you become more relaxed.

Picture a pot of water, full of sediment, that’s constantly being stirred,
causing it to turn cloudy. If you stop stirring and leave the pot alone, the
water will become calm and clear, and the sediment will sink to the bottom.

Similarly, when you relax your mind, your stresses and anxieties will sink to
the bottom, allowing you to see more clearly.

And according to Alan Wallace, an expert in relaxed concentration, clearing
your mind through meditation helps it reach its natural state of happiness.

To get started with mindfulness meditation, find a comfortable sitting position
where you feel relaxed and alert at the same time. Start by taking three slow,
deep breaths and then begin to breathe naturally. Now focus your attention on
your breath. This can mean observing, for example, the rise and fall of your
abdomen or the sensation in your nostrils. Whenever you find your attention has
drifted, gently bring it back to your breath. You can do this for ten minutes
or however much time feels right to you.

# Developing a deeper sense of self-awareness can help you master your emotions.

Mingyur Rinpoche, a Buddhist teacher, once said that the moment you see a
raging river, you’re already rising above it. Similarly, when you can see an
emotion, you’ve already ceased to be in the throes of it.

To overcome your emotions, you need self-awareness; once you become more
self-aware, you’ll be better able to become successful.

According to observations made by psychologists Dr. Cary Cherniss and Dr.
Robert Caplan, training in self-awareness helped financial advisors from
American Express to succeed in their work. The training taught them to become
more aware of unproductive self-talk – the negative, self-undermining stories
we often tell ourselves about ourselves – and this awareness allowed them to be
less self-doubting, which in turn resulted in higher earnings for themselves
and better advice for their clients.

Furthermore, after becoming aware of how they reacted to high-pressure
situations, they came to understand the importance of anti-stress techniques
such as meditation. With their stress levels lowered, they were able to work
with renewed focus, leading to success in their jobs.

Self-awareness works because it activates the **neocortex**, or the **thinking
brain**.

When you feel like your emotions are about to burst out uncontrollably,
self-awareness calls on the neocortex to analyze the outburst.

For instance, when your boss reprimands you for something, you might feel the
urge to shout back at her, but your neocortex, after analyzing the situation,
advises against it. It would be wiser, says this part of your brain, to
consider her feedback rationally and calmly, and use it to improve your work
performance.

Self-awareness can also improve your confidence. A prime example is the author
himself, who used self-awareness to become more self-confident.

He was scheduled to speak at the World Peace Festival, in Berlin. When he got
there, he felt extremely nervous, and so he used self-awareness to recall his
strengths and weaknesses. He reminded himself of his knowledge of wisdom
practices in corporate settings, and of his ability to create an atmosphere of
peacefulness and humor.

He also made himself aware of his shortcomings – namely, stumbling on words
while speaking English – and reminded himself that he could overcome this by
focusing on breathing deeply, smiling and practicing mindfulness.

Through this self-awareness, he was able to feel more comfortable and confident
at the festival.

# Intangible motivators like a shared purpose sustain employee motivation better than external rewards.

Many executives believe that external rewards – such as money or perks – are
the best motivators of high performances in the workplace.

But actually, intangible motivators can be even more effective at boosting
success and profits than concrete ones.

Here’s one example. Tony Hsieh, CEO of Zappos, the online shoe retailer, grew
his digital shop to a billion-dollar company. And the secret to Hsieh’s success
was **delivering happiness**. Building upon that ethos, Hsieh encouraged a work
culture that promoted employee happiness, which led to improved customer
service and, thus, happier customers.

Hsieh believes that happiness in the workplace comes from three things.

The first is **pleasure**. This type of happiness comes from chasing the next
high – for example, a big bonus, a thank-you from your colleagues, a special
mention by the vice president or a story in the **New York Times**. The
downside is that this kind of happiness doesn’t last long.

The next source of happiness is **passion**. When you’re passionate about your
work, you enter a state of **flow **– a state of total engagement and focus.
People have reported experiencing flow in a wide variety of activities, such as
performing brain surgery, filing papers and, yes, meditation. Furthermore,
passion, when compared to pleasure, is much more sustainable.

Finally, according to Hsieh, happiness also comes from a **higher purpose**.
It’s about being part of something that is bigger than yourself, and it’s the
most sustainable type of happiness. When you work toward fulfilling your higher
purpose, the work itself is the reward.

When the purpose of your work lines up with your values, it no longer becomes a
chore. You know what they say: If you love what you do, you’ll look forward to
doing it every day.

Just consider poet Norman Fischer, who loves his job so much that he doesn’t
consider it work. Even though Fischer is a renowned Zen teacher and often works
more than Silicon Valley professionals, in his eyes, he’s never worked a day in
his life.

# Empathy is useful in both personal and professional relationships.

If you want to become skilled at drawing, you need to practice it. The same
rule applies to improving your empathy, a type of emotional intelligence with
many benefits.

Empathizing with others and showing them kindness not only makes them feel
understood; it also builds trust.

Just consider an empathy exercise conducted by the author. He listened to his
exercise partner while she expressed her feelings, and then, when she had
finished, he relayed to her what he thought she was feeling. At the end of the
exercise, she was in tears, and told him that she hadn’t felt this understood
in a long time.

Empathy can also be used to patch up relationships by helping us manage
conflicts with our partners, coworkers and children. By using it, you can reach
an understanding together, helping you to quickly resolve issues.

This technique was used by the author to resolve the resentment he felt toward
his new manager, Eric. Deciding that he needed to deal with the issue, the
author arranged a meeting with Eric to talk through his ill feelings. During
the meeting, they talked about personal things, such as life stories and
aspirations. It was through this conversation that they got to know one another
better, and, in the end, the author no longer felt resentful.

If you ever feel like you’re lacking empathy for someone, you can try empathy
exercises such as **Just Like Me** and **Loving Kindness.**

Just Like Me asks you to imagine yourself in the other person’s shoes and come
to understand that they wish to be happy and loved, just like you.

The second exercise in empathy, Loving Kindness, requires you to meditate and
have positive wishes for the other person. Wishing the best for somebody else
will enhance your capacity for empathy and improve your relationship with them.

# Experiencing love from others could lead to our becoming better leaders.

Have you ever been told that, to get by in life, you need to be selfish and
take things for yourself?

Well, ignore that, because nothing could be further from the truth – especially
if you plan on becoming an effective leader.

That’s because people will work harder if they like their leader.

Leadership scholars Jim Kouzes and Barry Posner looked into what traits
distinguished successful managers from the rest. In their research, they found
that the key differentiator was affection. The successful managers displayed
warmth and fondness toward their employees. Unlike the lower-performing
managers, they weren’t afraid to develop a close relationship with their team
or to share their thoughts.

Leaders who show compassion are more effective at their jobs because they will
try to relieve any suffering their employees may be experiencing.

Jim Collins, the author of **Built to Last**, researched hundreds of large
American firms from 1965 to 1995 and found that what made a good company great
was leadership. Great companies had leaders who were compassionate, displayed
humility and aspired to make a difference in the world.

This is because compassionate leaders have an easier time influencing others.

Take renowned psychologist Paul Ekman, who went through a terrible childhood
and grew up to be an angry adult. In 2000, Ekman was invited to speak at a
conference where the Dalai Lama was present. He sat down with the Dalai Lama,
who reached out and held his hand. The simple gesture had a profound effect on
Ekman. He felt “goodness” throughout his entire being, and by the end of the
exchange, he found his anger fading and his outlook on life changing. Since
that life-changing moment, Ekman has contributed to scientific research by
furthering the understanding of emotional balance, compassion and altruism.

So remember: when you set out to find happiness and fulfillment in your life
and work, begin by searching inside yourself.

# Suggested further reading: The Untethered Soul by Michael A. Singer

**The Untethered Soul** is all about you: your feelings, thoughts and
consciousness. By drawing on different spiritual practices, this book explains
how you can navigate your own mind, get in touch with yourself and become your
own master, to ultimately achieve enlightenment.
