# Unleashing the Ideavirus

*by Seth Godin*

Source: [https://www.blinkist.com/books/unleashing-the-ideavirus-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/unleashing-the-ideavirus-en)

![Unleashing the Ideavirus](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5df8d8806cee070008c0014f/3_4/470.jpg)

Unleashing the Ideavirus (2000) provides a map for charting a successful
marketing campaign on the modern media landscape. It argues that the rise of
the internet and the decline of advertising as an effective way of reaching
people dictate that we need to rethink radically the way we approach marketing.
And this new approach should embrace the potential for ideas to go viral via
peer-to-peer communication.

# Final summary

To succeed in the modern economy, you have to create and spread compelling
ideas, not just physical products and services. The most effective way to
spread them is to turn them into ideaviruses. These allow you to bypass
traditional advertising, which is no longer an effective approach to marketing.
To unleash an ideavirus, you have to select the right hive, find the right
sneezers, and make sure the idea of your product or service can be as smoothly
transmitted as possible.

# What’s in it for me? Learn how to turn your product or service into the next viral sensation. 

If you spend any time online, you’re probably familiar with the concept of
something “going viral.” Someone posts a funny video on social media. A few
people share it with their friends, who then share it with even more people.
Pretty soon, a snowball effect kicks in, and the video is spreading everywhere,
like a virus. 

But it’s not just amusing online content that can go viral. Ideas, messages,
and information in general can also be contagious. They just need to be
communicated from person to person frequently enough and by enough people. 

If you work in marketing, the implications of this fact are enormous. It means
you don’t need to pour money into advertising to spread the word about your
product or service. Instead, you can spread it organically by getting consumers
to spread it to each other. In other words, you can unleash an **ideavirus** —
an idea that goes viral. 

Of course, that’s easier said than done. But there’s an art and a science to
doing it, and you’re about to learn both of them. 

In these blinks, you’ll find out
- why ideas are more important than ever in the modern economy; 
- why “sneezing” is a more effective marketing tactic than traditional
  advertising; and  
- why a product as simple as a vegetable peeler is really a “manifesto” for
  change.

# Thanks to the internet and our culture's craving for new products and services, we now have the ideal conditions for marketing via ideaviruses.

“Ideavirus.” The word is new, but the phenomenon itself goes back to the dawn
of history. For as long as people have been talking, they’ve also been
spreading ideas through person-to-person communication.

The idea of using this type of communication for marketing purposes isn’t new
either. The concept of word-of-mouth marketing has been around for many
decades. But something new is afoot. The internet has been a game-changer. 

In the olden days, ideas spread by word of mouth, but the process was slow, and
the effects were usually limited. Whether face-to-face or over the phone,
people literally had to talk to each other, one by one. As a result, they’d
usually spread a message to only a small number of friends, and a message would
typically die out before it could go viral. But things are different now. 

Today, one person can instantly share a message online with hundreds or even
thousands of people at a time. And each of **them **can do the same. This sets
the stage for **word-of-mouse** marketing. This type of marketing is
essentially the same as old-fashioned word-of-mouth marketing, but its reach is
massive, all thanks to online communication. If you’re a marketer, it’s much
easier to spread your message quickly and rapidly to a large number of people.

At the same time, people are also craving new products and services far more
than they used to. Yesterday’s culture valued the tried and true; today’s
culture values the cutting-edge. In the past, it was only the “nerds” who
wanted to get their hands on the latest piece of technology. Now, practically
everyone is interested. That’s why you end up with thousands of people lining
up just to buy the newest cell phone! 

This modern craving for new products and services is also a game-changer. When
a marketing message is spread through word of mouse, what’s happening is
essentially a form of digitally augmented gossip about a new product or
service. People are basically saying to each other, “Hey, here’s something
new.” In a culture in which people don’t value new things, that message is
unlikely to catch on. But in a culture in which they crave innovation, they’re
going to be much more receptive to it. 

Our society’s receptivity for new things, combined with the connectivity of the
internet age, creates the ideal conditions for marketing a product or service
by unleashing an ideavirus.

# Advertising is no longer an effective way to reach people. 

For marketers, the newfound possibilities of unleashing an ideavirus couldn’t
have come at a better time. That’s because the traditional approach to
marketing has reached a dead end. 

The traditional approach to marketing was centered on advertising. And whether
it took the form of a television commercial, a popup ad, or a roadside
billboard, the underlying objective was the same: interruption. One moment,
people would be watching the big game, reading the news, or driving down the
highway. Next thing they know, an advertiser would come along and try to
capture their attention for a few moments, just to blast an unwanted message at
them. 

That might have worked in the past, but nowadays, there’s simply too much
competition for people’s attention. The modern landscape is filled with
hundreds of television channels, thousands of magazines, and millions of
websites, and many of them are packed with ads. At the same time, the number of
new products introduced to the market has skyrocketed. In 1986, when the author
published his first book, about 300 other business books appeared on the
market. Twelve years later, in 1998, the number had risen to 1,778.  

Combine all of these media platforms, ads, and products, and the result is a
bunch of noise that most of us just want to tune out. And as the volume of the
noise increases with every passing year, the power of traditional marketing
becomes weaker and weaker. 

So what’s the alternative? The short answer is that if you work in marketing,
you need to flip the traditional paradigm on its head. Instead of trying to
force consumers to listen to you about your product or service, you should
encourage them to talk to each other. That’s where word-of-mouth, and its new
digital cousin, word-of-mouse marketing, come into the picture. 

The end goal, of course, is to unleash an ideavirus. And that means an
ideavirus isn’t just a novel spin on an old phenomenon. It’s the key to success
in the modern economy. And as you’ll find out in the next blink, that’s not
just because of the dwindling power of advertising; it’s also because of a
shift in the nature of the economy itself. 

# Whether you’re marketing a physical or digital product or service, you’re really marketing an idea.  

Once upon a time, the path to economic success was pretty straightforward. If
you lived in the agricultural or industrial eras, you just needed to set up an
efficient farm or factory. Churn out the corn. Crank out the widgets. Rake in
the cash. 

Nowadays, of course, you’re unlikely to make a fortune on crops or manufactured
goods. The modern economy is centered on ideas rather than physical products.
Intellectual property is the most obvious example: software, songs, TV shows,
websites, diets, technologies – the list goes on and on. 

But there are also the ideas embodied in revolutionary products and services,
which change the way that people think about the world. For instance, when
Hotmail came along, it introduced and popularized the idea of using a free
email service. And even when a company is selling a physical product, that
product usually derives its value from the idea it conveys. That’s why Nike Air
Jordans sell for $100: it’s the branding and what the product represents, not
just the quality of the shoes. 

Now, creating good ideas is a much more mysterious process than producing
high-quality corn or widgets. No one knows a surefire way of coming up with
one. But here’s something we do know for certain: to have an impact on the
world, an idea needs to be spread. As long as it remains trapped in just a few
people’s minds, it doesn’t do anyone much good. Other people need to hear about
it, and they need to be persuaded by it.

With this in mind, you can think of the idea represented by a product or
service as a manifesto. In one way or another, a manifesto conveys an argument
for doing something in a new way – even if it’s something fairly small in the
grand scheme of things. What’s important is that it be different. For example,
take a look at the OXO vegetable peeler. With its intuitive, ergonomic design,
it’s like a manifesto that shouts to consumers, saying, “Hey, here’s a more
comfortable way of peeling your vegetables!” 

The task of marketing is to spread these manifesto-like ideas to as many people
within a target audience as possible. The more they spread, the more successful
they will be. And if one of them takes on a life of its own and spreads
throughout a sought-after segment of the population, it’ll turn from an idea
into an ideavirus. 

Unleashing an ideavirus is thus the holy grail of modern marketing. 

# The more your idea is designed to resonate with your target audience, the more likely it will be to spread. 

Now that we’ve established the importance of tapping into the power of
ideaviruses, the question becomes: How do you actually go about unleashing
one? 

To begin with, if you want the idea of your product or service to spread like a
virus, you’ve got to make sure it’s worthy of being spread in the first place.
The more compelling it is, the more likely it will be to go viral. 

Of course, compelling-ness is in the eye of the beholder. What’s irresistible
to one group of people might be off-putting to another. And even within the
same group of people, what’s hot today might be old news tomorrow. Fads and
fashions come and go. One day, open-toed shoes and Palm Pilots are in; the next
day, they’re out. Sometimes they come back; sometimes they don’t. And some
moments are ripe for the debut of a new idea or the return of an old one, while
others are unreceptive. To make an idea go viral, you’ve got to have a good
sense of timing and a finger on the pulse of your target audience. 

You can think of the members of your target audience as forming a **hive** – an
interconnected group of people with their own rules, standards, fashions,
traditions, leaders, and ways of communicating with each other. Ideally, you’d
choose your hive first and then build your idea around it, rather than the
other way around. That way, you can tailor your ideas to the hive’s
sensibilities. In fact, you can even be the first company to create a product
or service that brings a hive together and taps into it as a consumer group. 

That was the key to the viral success of the magazine **Fast Company**. Before
its creators launched the magazine, they identified an untapped group of
consumers who weren’t yet part of a hive. They were people who worked in
midsize-to-large companies and were eager to succeed, but felt hemmed in by the
slow-paced bureaucracy of their workplaces. The magazine was created with them
in mind, and it provided them with a connection that helped them become a hive.
Subscribers shared the magazine’s articles with like-minded coworkers, and they
even formed a global network of **Fast Company**-inspired support groups. 

In doing so, they were marketing **Fast Company** to each other – unleashing an
ideavirus in the process. 

# Don’t aim too big when selecting your hive.

Even if you don’t start by selecting a hive and then designing an idea around
its members, you still need to be careful about which hive you select and how
you target it. 

Your natural temptation will be to pick the biggest hive possible, but that’s
usually a mistake. The bigger your hive, the harder it will be to spread your
message. There are a few reasons for this. To begin with, the competition to
reach a large hive is usually pretty fierce, and it will be difficult for your
message to rise above the noise. 

For instance, you’re not likely to unleash an ideavirus at the Consumer
Electronics Show in Las Vegas. It’s one of the largest trade shows in the
world. If you bring your product there, you’ll be competing with hundreds of
other big companies that are spending millions of dollars to try to do the same
thing. You’d have a much easier time going viral at a smaller trade show, like
a DEMO conference. 

Another problem with aiming too big is that by trying to appeal to everyone,
you can end up appealing to no one. Whether they’re college students,
gardeners, or computer geeks, different groups of people want very different
things. The more you focus on a particular group of people, the more you can
tailor your idea to their specific desires. And the smaller and more tightly
knit that group of people is, the easier it will be to spread your message
within their hive. 

That brings us to the last problem with aiming too big: even with the advent of
the internet, it’s still difficult to go viral with a huge hive of people.
Sure, some companies are able to spread their ideas through an entire
population. But your chances of being the next Google are pretty slim. You’re a
lot more likely to succeed if you target a specific segment of the population,
like a particular demographic group.  

The reason for this boils down to the numbers. To unleash an ideavirus, you
can’t just reach, say, 15 percent of the members of a hive. You need to achieve
nearly total saturation. And it’s simply too difficult for most companies to do
that with a huge population. 

So try to explode in a smaller hive – that’s a much better outcome than
fizzling out in a bigger one! 

# To get your ideavirus to spread, you need to find people who will “sneeze” it onto other members of your hive. 

Now that you’ve selected your hive, the next step to unleashing an ideavirus is
to take a closer look at the people who compose it. In theory, any member of
your hive can spread the idea of your product or service. But in practice, some
of them are much more likely to spread it than others. Let’s call them
**sneezers**. 

Simply put, sneezers are individuals or organizations who are prone to telling
other people about new ideas. They come in two varieties. First, there are
**promiscuous sneezers**. These are talkative people who are almost always
eager to share their favorite new ideas with nearly anyone who will listen to
them. Imagine an uncle who’s always talking about some new gadget he’s
discovered.

Second, there are **powerful sneezers.** Members of the hive hold these people
in high esteem. When they champion an idea, people listen. Just think of how
Oprah can turn an obscure book into a best seller practically overnight just by
saying she’s read it!  

Of course, your chances of convincing someone like Oprah to promote your
ideavirus are pretty slim. You’re much more likely to win over powerful
sneezers who are less famous but still influential within the hive you’re
targeting. That’s what the publisher Warner Books did. They wanted to promote a
romance novel called **The Bridges of Madison County**. Instead of pinning
their hopes on Oprah, they reached out to independent bookstores. Those are
powerful sneezers within the hive of book readers, and they helped the novel to
become a best-selling sensation. 

To make your idea go viral, you’ll usually need a mix of powerful and
promiscuous sneezers on your side. Remember, by definition, an ideavirus is an
idea that spreads – and sneezers are the people who do most of the spreading.
That’s why they’re called sneezers! Win them over and you have a better chance
of unleashing a successful ideavirus. In the next blink, we’ll look at how to
woo them into becoming advocates of your idea. 

# Promiscuous sneezers and powerful sneezers require very different recruitment strategies. 

When you’re trying to recruit a sneezer to spread your ideavirus, the first
question you want to ask yourself is: Which type of sneezer am I dealing with? 

The “sneeze” of a powerful sneezer is highly infectious, but it’s also very
difficult to trigger. That’s because powerful sneezers are selective about the
ideas they spread, and their endorsements can’t be bought. In fact, their power
depends on the public’s perception of their selectivity and integrity. If
people sense a powerful sneezer can be bribed into endorsing anything, they’ll
stop trusting her opinion, and then she’ll lose her influence. 

In contrast, promiscuous sneezers are much less selective about the ideas they
spread, and you can motivate them with money or other incentives. That makes
them much easier to persuade into sneezing on your behalf. Unfortunately, it
also makes their sneezes much less infectious. People know that a promiscuous
sneezer’s endorsement can be bought, so they usually take it with a grain of
salt. 

So here’s the bottom line with promiscuous sneezers: individually, their
sneezes don’t take you very far – but if you can convince enough of them to
sneeze enough times on enough people, they can still be effective transmitters
of your ideavirus. For example, you’d only have to convince them to sign up for
an affiliate program or leave a review on a website. And in the age of the
internet, it’s easier to get them to do that than ever before. 

As for powerful sneezers, a single endorsement from one of them can be a
game-changer, so you definitely want to do everything you can to get them on
your side. And while you can’t bribe them into spreading your ideavirus, you
can put your best foot forward in courting them. For example, let’s say you’re
attending a conference full of people who are powerful sneezers in the hive
you’re targeting. Don’t just give them a speech about your product. Provide
them with a free sample. Fly in satisfied customers to give them in-person
testimonials. Throw an after-party so you can answer their questions
one-on-one. 

In other words, do whatever you can to transmit your ideavirus from your mind
to theirs. Sure, they might take a pass on spreading it – but they definitely
won’t spread it if you don’t infect them with it in the first place! 

# Make sure your ideavirus is as easy for people to spread as possible. 

We’ve been talking about sneezes and viruses in a metaphorical sense, but now
let’s think about them in a literal sort of way for a moment. What happens if
you have an actual, physical virus and you sneeze on someone? Do they get the
virus? Well, it depends on how easily the virus can spread. The same is true of
your ideavirus. 

The easier it is for people to spread your ideavirus, the **smoother **it will
be. Some products and services are so smooth that people end up spreading the
idea of them just by using them. For instance, every time you take a picture
with a Polaroid camera and share it with your friends, you’re promoting the
idea of instant photography. They can watch the photo develop right in front of
their eyes, so it’s as if you’re giving them a live demonstration of the idea
in action.

On the opposite end of the smoothness spectrum, some ideas are much more
difficult to spread. For example, let’s say you’re a reflexology therapist. If
you want to promote the idea of your service, you’ve got an uphill battle in
front of you. A lot of people don’t even know what reflexology is, and it’s
quite difficult to explain. 

Fortunately, even if your idea falls at the rougher end of the spectrum, there
are still ways you can make it smoother. For instance, imagine you’re living in
the late 1990s, and you’re one of the designers of the Toyota Prius – the first
mass-produced hybrid electric car. The car’s innovation is a somewhat
technical, difficult-to-explain idea. What could you do to make it smoother? 

Well, to begin with, you could give it a better name. You want people to talk
about your product as much as possible, but they’re unlikely to bring it up in
conversation if they’re not even sure about the pronunciation. Is it “pry-us”
or “pree-us”? People weren’t sure when the car debuted. 

You could also give it a much more interesting appearance. In reality, the
Prius looks like nearly every other sedan on the market, so it’s unlikely to
turn heads. But imagine if it had as distinctive a design as the Volkswagen
Beetle. In that case, it would be like a self-advertising billboard on wheels! 

You could then play up that billboard-like effect in all sorts of creative
ways. For instance, you could put a digital bumper sticker on the back of the
car that displays the driver’s fuel mileage – up to 90 miles per gallon. That
would be a simple but effective way of conveying one of the key messages of the
Toyota Prius’s “manifesto”: by lowering your fuel consumption, this is a car
that can help save the planet **and** save you money! 

Remember: Your product or service is the embodiment of your idea – so make sure
it expresses that idea as clearly and persuasively as possible! 

# What to read next: Poke the Box, by Seth Godin

You’ve just learned about turning an idea into an ideavirus – but how do you
develop a good idea for a product or service in the first place? You’ve surely
heard the expression “think outside the box.” Well, Seth Godin has another
suggestion: Go one step farther, and poke the box! 

To explain what he means by this, Godin tells the story of an electronic,
box-shaped toy that his uncle invented for his cousin. It had various buttons
on it, and depending on how you pressed them, you’d produce different
combinations of light and sound. The point of it was to poke around and see
what happens. And that’s precisely what you need to do to come up with an
innovative idea!

To learn more about how to adopt this playful approach to idea development,
check out our blinks to **Poke the Box,** by Seth Godin. 
