# Innovation for the Fatigued

*by Alf Rehn*

Source: [https://www.blinkist.com/books/innovation-for-the-fatigued-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/innovation-for-the-fatigued-en)

![Innovation for the Fatigued](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5dfcc3096cee07000788a282/3_4/470.jpg)

(2019) grapples with a curse of the corporate world: innovation fatigue. Rather than inventing anything useful or new, many organizations are mired in fashionable soundbites about “disruption” and “blue sky thinking.” It peels back the layers of nonsense to look at how companies can establish a deep and purposeful innovation culture.

## Final summary

The corporate world is full of repetitive and often nonsensical jargon about
innovation. 

Rather than clarifying anything that could meaningfully contribute to creating
new and useful products, it adds to the noise. This is shallow innovation the
development of in-app purchases and meaningless “updates.” 

This is a particular corporate culture that breeds apathy and a loss of
productivity in the organization involved. 

To actually innovate, companies need to reconnect with purposefulness. They
need to aim for real, impactful change, which will then instill a broader sense
of purpose in their workforce.

## What’s in it for me? Dig beneath the surface and learn about deep innovation.

If you’ve been to a bookstore recently, you might have seen shelves lined with
titles like “Disruptive Thinking” and “Maverick Innovators.” If all these
buzzwordy titles failed to excite you, there’s a good reason.

But to many, all these titles all just sound the same. All of that hyperbole.
All of those “revolutionary” innovations. And the result of it all is what?
Another dating app like that other dating app?

This is **shallow innovation. **And the world is full of with it. In these
blinks we look at its opposite: **deep innovation.**** **This kind of
innovation requires a radical approach that shouldn’t be considered radical at
all. It means trying to make sense in a world of jargon and innovating for
reasons beyond purely short-term commercial objectives.

In these blinks, you’ll learn
- what happened when Alf Rehn gave a nonsensical presentation to a leading tech
  company;
- that many organizations squander the talent that’s right under their noses;
  and
- how one German company broke the mold.

## Innovation has become a tired buzzword.

When author Alf Rehn gave talks to corporate leaders a decade ago, the room
would listen attentively and with genuine enthusiasm. Today, as soon as he
utters the word “innovation,” people become fidgety, sag in their seats, or
sigh in exasperation. They’re tired of even hearing the word. 

If you listen to entrepreneurial jargon, you’ll hear words like “revolutionary”
and “ground-breaking” about products like Kellogg’s Pop Tarts or minor
adaptations to certain models of car. The vocabulary of radical change has been
co-opted for often uninspiring purposes.

Just as there is an abundance of “innovation” jargon, there are oceans of books
about the trend. In fact, there are around **100** such books published each
month. 100! But while there is a lot of talk about innovation – which you might
expect to be full of new, exciting ideas – these books can be boring and
repetitive.

This is because the advice has become so standardized that AI could feasibly
write a passable innovation book. If it did, it would include the endlessly
repeated advice on how to “experiment and test with customers,” “take chances,”
and “learn to embrace failure.”

Rehn demonstrated just how far this innovation talk had gone via an experiment
with a leading tech company. Having been invited to give a 20-minute talk on
innovation at the company (which Rehn prefers to keep anonymous, for fear of
embarrassing them), he got to work right away.

Wanting to make a good impression on such a massive organization, he decided to
plan for many more hours worth of material than he actually had to present.
When he arrived at the organization, he met their leadership team for some
preliminary discussions. At such a prestigious company, he expected a robust,
invigorating back-and-forth of ideas. Instead, he was disappointed to find they
had little appetite for a real exchange of ideas.

Emboldened, Rehn decided that he would compose a nonsensical speech made up
entirely of buzzwords for his big presentation. He delivered the speech
sincerely, with all the necessary emphasis and gestures. He declared things
like: “So, you need to **be** the box you think outside of!” The audience of
tech leaders and innovators listened eagerly. Some even took notes. 

## In the corporate world, there is too much “shallow innovation” and not enough “deep innovation.”

Rehn was once asked to assist a struggling med-tech company in the US with its
innovation plan. Once he’d settled in and given his first presentation to the
leadership, he asked the company what they wanted to achieve. He found their
answers troubling, to say the least.

The heads of this med-tech company spouted all of the fashionable innovation
jargon of the moment. They spoke of “disruption” and “mavericks.” They spoke of
creating med-tech products with “in-app purchases,” which made Rehn imagine the
absurdity of having to swipe a credit card to upgrade a pacemaker to a
functioning level. 

Their ideas seemed to have very little substance at heart; most just consisted
of strings of fashionable phrases. This is an example of the shallow innovation
that characterizes so many organizations – merely tinkering around the edges
and offering superficial changes.

By contrast, **deep innovation** requires a focus on big solutions. Rather than
modifications like “in-app purchases” or “new, improved recipes,” deep
innovation might mean starting from scratch or heading off into an entirely
different direction.

Let’s consider what the difference means in practice. Shallow innovation might
mean creating an app for finding the best time to go to the beach. Deep
innovation would be creating a way to clean plastic waste from the ocean.
Shallow innovation would be about launching another cookie-cutter makeup brand.
Deep innovation would be about launching a line that is entirely biodegradable.
Shallow innovation might secure corporate credibility or funding. Deep
innovation could save the world.

## Corporations often miss the innovative potential that is right under their noses.

The title of a book by Fredrik Erixson and Bjorn Weigel – **The Innovation
Illusion: How is so little created by so many working so hard?** – perfectly
summarizes what’s happening at many corporations today. 

In many businesses, there are plenty of well-educated, talented people who
spend a good deal of their time on pointless tasks and in pointless roles.
Whether it’s on checkbox bureaucracy or on superficial corporate “targets,”
their creative potential isn’t properly utilized. 

The author would often visit struggling organizations and find that the company
**could **be rich in ideas, if only it listened to more of its employees. He
found employees with extraordinary cognitive and creative abilities at every
paygrade, who were all directing their energies into meaningless roles.

Consider how people behave when they’re not stuck in front of the TV – as
they’ve tended to be, in large numbers, throughout the mid and late 20th
century. They edit Wikipedia, create fan art, and collaborate on projects both
whimsical and important. This cognitive ability, which is wasted much of the
time, could be put to great use.  

Unfortunately, well-educated, computer literate, and information-rich
individuals are all too often squandered on small ideas. Paraphrasing the
beat-poet Allen Ginsberg, data scientist Jeffrey Hammerbacher has said “the
best minds of my generation are thinking about making people click ads.” This
is the flaw at the heart of so many organizations. Whether it’s incentivizing
people to click on online ads or tweaking the color scheme of a new handbag
range, many organizations employ their workforces on small ideas.

Consider social media platforms like Twitter or Facebook, and the way that they
continuously change their interfaces with endless “updates.” For many of us,
they are perfectly adequate platforms that are subject to needless
interference. It’s common to see users post things like “give me back the old
version!” in exasperation. This is mirrored in the way that computer programs
are perpetually subject to minor upgrades that the average user has no need
for. Directing so much talent on incremental change is a huge flaw in the
system.

## AI isn’t the answer to the innovation deficit.

Many people in the corporate world who look forward to a future where
artificial intelligence is able to do all the real work. As long as
profitability in ensured, what does it matter who does the work? 

However, the certainty of a technological future where humans are redundant, is
misplaced. This belief is not new; in the 19th century it was a common fear
that industrial machines would make the broader population jobless. And the
idea that human employees will be replaced by advanced robots has been around
for a while. But in relation to real innovation, it doesn’t look like robots
will be surpassing human beings anytime soon.

While we can’t forecast what the future will look like precisely, we can
consider what we know about machine learning **right now**. And one thing we do
know, is that machine learning follows logical patterns determined by
algorithms. It works by analyzing existing data with a speed and precision that
no human mind could manage. While this is extraordinarily useful in many
scenarios, from medical science to finance, it’s mainly for data-driven
**improvement**, not innovation in itself.

Real innovation, which looks beyond what we do and know now, is still a human
game. We have the ability to think in ways that make seemingly illogical leaps
between topics and themes, which no machine is able to replicate. It is this
ability to link seemingly unconnected things together and blend them in
unexpected ways that drives our innovative ability. For instance, no algorithm
would be able to consider starting a hotel business without first owning a
hotel. No algorithm would be able to make the leap from selling cheap flights,
to building a supersonic jet. Or move from the supersonic jet, to thinking
about life in the cosmos and the future benefits of space stations.

However, many businesses today actually function more like algorithms than
human-led organizations. An incremental, data-driven approach is favored,
rather than one that fully utilizes human creativity. This means that many
businesses seek to make their existing operations as efficient as possible –
finessing them, rather than doing any real innovation. Or, put differently,
most companies focus more on the **how** than on the **why.**

## Nurturing environments are vital for innovation.

You know the competitive rough-and-tumble of office politics, the endless
gibing, the one-upmanship? Or, on a grander scale, the departmental rivalries
that dominate organizations? Unsurprisingly, none of that is very useful when
we want to innovate. 

Innovation is often associated with terms like “maverick” and “dynamism,” but
it neglects **nurture**. There is a kind of machismo about certain aspects of
corporate culture that isn’t conducive to the kind of open, reflective
environment where innovation can flourish.

To successfully embed innovation into an organization means encouraging an
encompassing and nurturing culture. If we look at the etymology of the word
“culture,” we can get a clue. It comes from the Latin “cultus,” which can be
translated as “care” or “cultivation.” Like the farmer, the organization must
carefully tend their work culture, rather than simply relying on the brilliance
of lone mavericks. The whole organization must be a nurturing system, where
everyone is given the right kind of environment to innovate. You can’t expect a
whole crop of bright shoots if you’re planting on hard, infertile ground.

To use another rural analogy: a horse-breeder that raised one champion stallion
would very likely have in place the right set-up to produce another. The
pastures, the stables, and training would all be key in facilitating other
horses to become champions.

This nurturing environment requires that workers feel **safe**. Much like in
our private lives, we must feel a certain degree of trust before we open up
fully to others in the work environment. This is what we call “psychological
safety.” The term, which is attributed to the American scholar Amy Edmondson,
is used to describe a positive state in work teams, where all individuals feel
that they’re able to voice their ideas and opinions without fearing censure or
dismissal.

With “Project Aristotle” – one of the biggest studies ever undertaken on the
subject of teamwork – Google found that psychological safety was probably
**the** most important indicator of an efficient team. While strong leadership
did little or nothing to determine whether a group was efficient, psychological
safety had a massive impact.

## Diversity is an ally of innovation.

**Brotopia: Breaking Up the Boy’s Club Of Silicon Valley** – The title of tech
journalist and author Emily Chang’s book alone offers a revealing insight into
the world of tech-innovation. It’s a man’s world. Or more accurately, a white
man’s world.

Steve Jobs is the archetypal image of the great innovator. If it’s not him,
it’s Elon Musk or Bill Gates. So many innovators that dominate our collective
consciousness are white men. Although we can all easily picture Steve Jobs in
his black turtleneck as the icon of tech-innovation, we should just as easily
be able to think of Hedy Lamarr – the Austrian-American actress and inventor,
who designed technologies that made things like Bluetooth and WiFi possible. Or
Gertrude Belle Elion, who created the first treatment for leukemia, the first
successful drug for treating herpes, and the first medication to treat and
prevent HIV. But we don’t.

As in so many other aspects in our society, the world of innovation is hampered
by economic inequality. Without the security and support networks that come
with privilege, people are much less likely to be able to throw themselves into
innovation. Even Steve Jobs – who didn’t come from a particularly wealthy
background – was able to attend an expensive, prestigious college because his
adoptive parents took great financial risks by paying for him to go. Not
everyone is able to do that.

The lack of diversity in innovation means that the solutions often reflect the
problems of the people that come up with them. If the people who are promoted
and funded to innovate are mostly the “tech bros” of Emily Chang’s book, then
the fruits of their innovation are likely to reflect **their** interests.  

Consider, for instance, how many apps there are for the home delivery of food.
Or look at the gaming world. There is a dizzying cornucopia of games and
peripheral purchases to choose from. If your interests extend beyond getting
pizza delivered to your house and gaming late into the night, your needs aren’t
quite so well catered to. It’s not to say that those who aren’t “tech bros”
can’t enjoy these things (lots obviously do), it’s just that many innovations
inordinately reflect their interests.

Because of this lack of diversity, the problems that are confronted are narrow.
On one level, this can’t possibly benefit the organizations, as innovation is a
numbers game. The greater array of ideas that are generated, the more likely
that some of them will succeed. On another level, if your sole innovators are
the most privileged demographics, then how can you expect them to deal with the
world’s most pressing problems?

## The increasing loss of meaning in the corporate world is fundamentally harmful for organizations.

In 1986, the philosopher Harry Frankfurt wrote an essay entitled **On
Bullshit**. He argued that it wasn’t simply an inappropriate word, but an
accurate description of something that isn’t exactly intentional lying but that
is “unconnected to a concern with the truth.”

There is an increasing amount of what can very bluntly be termed “bullshit” in
the corporate world. One example the author describes involves a British
consultant, who was hired by a major retailer to help develop their innovation
strategy. 

The author watched him deliver his keynote speeches, during which this
outwardly confident and successful consultant made a series of entirely
contradictory statements – much like the parody speech that the author had
given.

Except this one was real. The consultant stated that innovation was to be at
the foundation of a company, but that it must also “blast” that foundation
away. He declared that only the companies that throw themselves into
“destroying their current business before someone else does” will survive!

This expert was a prime example of a “bullshitter.” There was nothing in the
speech that could have been usefully applied towards the purpose of building a
sustainable innovation culture at the retailer. It was frightening nonsense,
the work of a quack.

And this tide of nonsense, apart from being intensely frustrating, actually has
a pernicious **economic **effect for corporations themselves – by eating away
at **purpose**.

The loss of purpose affects employees at every paygrade of an organization.
Indeed, the pollster Gallup found in 2017 that only 15% of employees globally
felt meaningfully engaged in their work. Many of those people are in what the
radical theorist David Graeber calls “bullshit jobs.” Those ad-clicking jobs,
those spam-writing jobs, those meaningless admin jobs. 

And as bullshit jobs enervate the workforce, they also have an economic cost
for the company. The loss of purpose is bad for productivity. It leads to
increased absenteeism and higher staff turnover. 

The obvious solution is a corporate culture that is rooted in purposefulness.
Companies should prioritize values and concrete, real-world solutions, rather
than simply contributing more “bullshit” to the world. In the final blink,
we’ll consider what purposefulness might mean in more detail. 

## Organizations should focus on meaningful innovations that serve concrete purposes.

If “bullshit jobs” and corporate jargon lead to apathy and a decline in real
innovation, then purposefulness is surely the antidote**.**

Take the example of one German company called Anti-Germ. Founded in Memmingen
in 1938, it is now a leading international company in the business of culinary
safety. It provides detergents, disinfectants, and other services for dairies,
farms, and the food and beverage industry. But rather than remain in the “safe
zone” of the domestic food industry, CEO Matthias Kötter likes to emphasize
that the company, through its subsidiary Medintech, created a **truly**
revolutionary product called Aquatabs.

These are a cheap and easy solution for creating drinkable water in countries
where much of the water in unclean. Aquatabs are dissolvable tablets that can
be put into even the most highly contaminated water to make it drinkable. Used
by countless NGOs globally, they are the leading water-purification tablet in
the world. They have already saved countless lives, decreasing the numbers of
children who would’ve otherwise died from the severe diarrhea and dehydration
that results from waterborne disease.

The effect that an innovation like this can have on a business’s whole culture
is eye-opening. In the case of Anti-Germ, rather than simply serving the food
and beverage industry, the company wanted to emphasize that they did something
more ambitious than catering to a Western market and ensuring that their
products lived up to the standards set by the authorities. 

Their investment in Aquatabs was a powerful gesture that communicated that the
company was about much more than disinfectant. It demonstrated to employees
that, even in a capacity working at a disinfectant company, they were able to
save lives. The result was a healthy innovation culture, far from the world of
“bullshit jobs.” 

To customers, it communicated integrity and a commitment to quality that would
be difficult for competitors to surpass. It said: **our products aren’t just at
the forefront of domestic food and beverage sanitation, but are trusted to save
lives in the most extreme conditions.**

It is real purposefulness like this that can move beyond the soundbites and
meaningless “me-too” innovations that characterize so much of the corporate
world. And it is this type of innovation that today’s companies should be
striving for.

## What to read next: The Creative Curve by Allen Gannet

You’ve learned about the value of **deep innovation**. How the one thing that
stands between the enervating jargon of the corporate world is purposeful
creativity. To be really innovative involves rejecting the simply slick,
shallow, and copycat.

But what if you don’t think you’re a creative person? Well, that’s not
possible. We all have the capacity to create. Rather than being down to
inexplicable bursts of inspiration or genius, creativity can be a learned
behavior. In fact, as Allen Gannet demonstrates through a mixture of science
and anecdote, we can train ourselves to be continuously creative. To find out
how, get the blinks for **The Creative Curve.**
