# Trillion Dollar Coach by Eric Schmidt, Jonathan Rosenberg and Alan Eagle

![Trillion Dollar Coach](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5ce515c56cee0700081dcd8f/1_1/470.jpg)

>Trillion Dollar Coach (2019) pays homage to Bill Campbell, a coach and mentor
>whose advice and insights helped some of Silicon Valley’s brightest lights
>build multi-billion dollar companies. In these blinks, Google leaders Eric
>Schmidt, Jonathan Rosenberg and Alan Eagle chart Campbell’s remarkable life,
>from the Columbia University football field to the Californian boardrooms in
>which the digital revolution was planned and rolled out. Along the way, they
>shed light on Coach Bill’s leadership philosophy.

# Final summary

The key message in these blinks:

A working-class ex-football coach with a non-technical degree who’d
parachuted into California at the relatively ripe age of 43, Bill Campbell
wasn’t exactly your average Silicon Valley star. But that didn’t stop him
becoming one of the most important business gurus in the world. With his
passion and straight-talking advice, Campbell helped a series of start-ups
conquer the world and generate trillions of dollars in revenue.

## Actionable advice: 

**Don’t waste meetings dwelling on emotional responses** One of Bill’s most
important lessons, Apple executive Eddy Cue recalls, was his insistence on
getting emotional responses to setbacks out of the way at the beginning of
meetings and moving on to other issues at hand. Psychologists call this**
problem-focused coping**. This is essentially all about saving your energy for
constructive problem-solving. So if you’ve got a meeting planned in which you
know you’ll be talking about something that’s gone wrong, make sure to schedule
some time for venting, but keep it short.

# What’s in it for me? A look at the life and philosophy of a Silicon Valley legend.

What comes to mind when you think of Silicon Valley? Chances are that black
turtlenecks, vast fortunes and Facebook rank high on your list of associations.
But what about a working-class Pennsylvanian football coach who cursed like a
sailor and blew kisses to his colleagues across the boardroom?

Well, meet Bill Campbell, a business guru every bit as unorthodox as he was
instrumental in helping start-ups like Apple and Google become the household
names and multi-billion dollar ventures they are today. A friend and mentor to
everyone from Steve Jobs to Google’s ex-CEO Eric Schmidt, Bill’s unique
insights into leadership and team-building made him one of the world’s most
influential and important business minds by the time of his death in 2016.

That might sound like the work of a lifetime, but Bill crammed his amazing
achievements into just a few decades. And unlike so many other would-be gurus,
Bill was a one-off, a true original who never forgot his roots or the lessons
he’d learned as a college football coach.

Based on over 80 interviews with the people who knew and loved him, these
blinks explore the life and ideas of a true Silicon Valley legend. Along the
way, you’ll learn
- what flat hierarchies can and can’t do;
- why the most effective leaders don’t shy away from showing their emotions;
- why trust is the most important currency in the boardroom.

# Bill Campbell started out as a football coach.

Silicon Valley is often associated with whip-smart university dropouts who
revolutionize the world from their garages before they hit their mid-twenties.
But innovation in the Golden State isn’t just a young man’s game – in fact, one
of the tech mecca’s greatest pioneers didn’t arrive in California until he was
already in his forties.

Born in the Pennsylvanian steel town of Homestead in 1940, Bill Campbell was
the son of a physical education teacher who moonlighted at the local mill. A
quick-witted and determined student, Bill was set on making something of
himself early on in life. In his teens, he took to the op-ed pages of the
school newspaper to remind his peers of the importance of good grades and to
warn them against “loafing.”

But it wasn’t an academic career that he’d set his sights on – his true passion
was football. After heading to New York to study economics at Columbia
University in 1958, he joined the college team, the Lions. He wasn’t the most
likely candidate: weighing 165 pounds and standing five foot ten, he was the
team’s smallest member by some margin. But what he lacked in physical stature,
he made up for in fearlessness and willpower – qualities that earned him the
nickname “Ballsy.” Under his inspired captaincy, the Lions won the Ivy League
title in 1961, a feat they’ve never managed to repeat.

At the end of his studies, Bill was offered a position as an assistant football
coach at Boston College. He jumped at the chance and moved north in 1964. Over
the next decade he established himself as a highly capable coach, and offers
from other universities began flooding in. One came from Penn State, home of
the nation’s top college football coach, Joe Paterno. It was a golden
opportunity but Bill turned it down. Why? In a word, loyalty – his alma mater
had also offered him a job.

Returning to Columbia in 1974 was a sentimental rather than a practical
decision. The university’s football facilities were in poor shape and badly
underfunded. This showed through in the team’s results. During Bill’s tenure,
the Lions won just 12 games and lost 41, a run of bad form which ended in a
humiliating 69-0 drubbing at the hands of Rutgers at Giants stadium. It was
time to move on, and in 1979 Bill resigned.

# Bill’s decision to move to California launched his business career.

Bill’s coaching career was over and, aged 39, he entered the business world.
His first job was at the ad agency J. Walter Thompson. He showed the same
enthusiasm in his new role as he had on the gridiron, and clients loved him –
especially Kodak, who decided to poach Bill from the agency and install him as
their head of consumer products in Europe. It was a brilliant start to a
late-blooming career.

Things got even better in 1983, when Bill received a call from an old Columbia
buddy. John Sculley had just left Pepsi to become the CEO of a tech start-up
called Apple. Convinced he was on to the next big thing, John offered Bill a
chance to get in on the ground floor. It was a huge move, but Bill accepted.

Why? Well, he believed he’d climbed as high up the corporate ladder as he
could: more senior positions would be unattainable for him because of his
unorthodox background as a football coach. California, however, was different.
It was easygoing and more of a meritocracy – in other words, a great place to
take his career to the next level.

He wasn’t wrong. Nine months later, Bill had been made vice president of sales
and tasked with overseeing the launch of Apple’s new flagship computer, the
Macintosh. It was in that position that he made one of the smartest decisions
in the company’s history.

In 1984, Apple bought an advertising spot during that year’s Super Bowl. Bill’s
team had come up with an ad that riffed on George Orwell’s dystopian novel
**1984**. It showed a young woman running from armed guards before bursting
into a monumental chamber filled with grey-uniformed men with shaved heads
watching a “Big Brother” figure giving a speech on a large screen. As she
tosses a mallet at the screen, causing it to explode, a narrator promises that
“1984 won’t be like **1984**.”

Steve Jobs loved it, but Apple’s board hated it. Worried it was too
controversial, they tried to sell the slot to another company. That’s when a
sales executive asked for Bill’s final verdict. Throwing caution to the wind,
he gave the go-ahead. The rest is history. The Big Brother-themed spot became
one of the most famous ads of all time and ushered in the era of Super Bowl
advertising we know today.

# After leaving Apple, Bill set himself on the path to coaching and mentoring.

The first leg of Bill’s journey with Apple came to an end in 1990. In his last
years at the company, he headed up a spin-off software venture called Claris.
It did well under his stewardship, but Apple ultimately decided against making
Claris public. That was Bill’s signal to leave and begin a new chapter in his
career. He would spend the next decade at the tablet computer startup GO and
software manufacturer Claris, before trying his hand as a business coach.

And his first client? His old employer, Apple. We’ve already seen that it was
Bill’s sense of loyalty that brought him back to Columbia as a coach. Well,
that quality ran deep. When Steve Jobs was forced out of Apple back in 1985,
Bill was one of the only prominent team members to argue that the company
couldn’t afford to lose their talented figurehead.

Jobs remembered that loyalty. When he was reinstated as Apple’s CEO in 1997, he
named Bill one of the company’s directors – a position he retained until 2014.
But there was more to it than that. Whenever he needed advice or to talk things
out, Jobs called Bill. Over the following years, Bill worked side by side with
Jobs as he rescued Apple from near-bankruptcy and put it on the path to
becoming a trillion-dollar company.

Word of Bill and Jobs’ Sunday afternoon walks around their Palo Alto
neighborhood soon spread. In 2001, Eric Schmidt decided to find out what all
the fuss was about. Schmidt, a software engineer and entrepreneur who’d worked
with an array of top Silicon Valley companies, had just been named CEO of a
small start-up called Google. A star in his own right, Schmidt was initially
skeptical and wondered what on earth a gruff ex-football coach could teach him.

It didn’t take him long to change his mind. At their first meeting, the two men
instantly hit it off. Over the next 15 years, Bill met up with Eric and other
Google leaders just about every week. By the end of that decade and a half,
Google – like Apple – was worth billions of dollars.

So what exactly did Bill’s trillion-dollar coaching entail? Well, that’s what
we’ll be exploring in the following blinks.

# True leaders champion their companies’ core values and break ties rather than dictating terms.

In 2001, when Bill started working with Google, the company was in the middle
of a radical experiment. Fed up with top-down interference in creative
projects, Google’s co-founder Larry Page had decided to do away with managers
altogether.

Larry’s so-called “disorg” model seemed to be working, but Bill thought it
wasn’t sustainable. Their argument went back and forth until Bill made a
suggestion: Why not ask the folks at the sharp end of the action – Google’s
engineers – what **they **thought?

The response was unanimous – they wanted managers. Why? They needed leaders to
resolve stalemates. Because everyone was on an equal footing, disagreements
about which projects needed prioritizing weren’t being resolved.

There’s plenty of evidence to back that intuition up. As a 2005 study in the
**American Journal of Sociology **notes, flat hierarchies are great at
fostering creativity but less adept at implementing the innovation that
results. Rolling out projects like Google’s search engine is all about
logistics, and that means someone needs to make tough calls about how resources
are going to be allocated.

However, autocratic management isn’t a viable solution either. After all, if
you start dictating terms to talented subordinates, you’ll end up driving them
away. But if neither democracy nor autocracy works, how **do **you make those
kinds of calls?

Here’s Bill’s answer: When you’re in a tricky situation and can’t reach an
agreement, it’s a leader’s duty to remind everyone of the company’s **first
principles** – the values that define its mission and purpose. That’s a lesson
he learned back in the 1990s, when he worked with Tellme Networks.

Tellme had just created the first cloud-based speech recognition software, but
it was strapped for cash. That’s when telecommunications giant AT&amp;T offered
to pay tens of millions of dollars to license the software if Tellme agreed to
exit the market.

Half the board, including CEO John LaMacchia, wanted to take the deal. Bill was
against it, but knew he’d lose the team if he ramrodded his view through. So he
decided to take a walk with Tellme founder Mike McCue and talk principles.

Bill reminded Mike that the company had the best product in the business.
AT&amp;T’s deal was lucrative, but it would ultimately mean withdrawing
Tellme’s innovative technology and gifting market dominance to a substandard
alternative. Was that really why Mike had set up the company? It was the
wake-up call Mike needed. When he laid out Tellme’s principles to the board,
the deadlock was broken and the offer was rejected.

# Effective leaders aren’t afraid to show their emotions.

There’s a common idea that people who show their emotions in the workplace
aren’t as competent as their less “touchy-feely” peers. But that’s a fallacy.
Few people know that better than the folks who worked with Bill.

Bill was famous for his personal warmth and informality. He gave his colleagues
bear hugs, had a breezy – and often downright profane – way of talking, and
wouldn’t hesitate to blow a kiss to a colleague on the other side of a meeting
room. More importantly, he’d drop everything to help people out if they were in
trouble. When Steve Jobs was incapacitated by cancer, for example, Bill visited
him in the hospital every day.

This wasn’t just a personal quirk – showing that you care about the people you
work with is a telltale sign of an effective leader.

Take a 2014 study by leadership and HR experts Sigal Barsade and Olivia
O’Neill. They found that organizations which foster **companionate love** – a
kind of emotional openness that treats everyone as equals – have higher rates
of employee satisfaction, better team performance levels and lower absenteeism.
That’s because this approach breaks down the barriers between the personal and
professional, which in turn means that people don’t feel like they have to
check parts of their personalities at the door when they enter the office.

Showing your emotions at work might seem like a scary proposition. But don’t
worry – you don’t have to be as outgoing as Bill to pull it off. In fact, there
all sorts of simple ways to create a more open, accepting environment. When
Bill was working at Apple, he made sure that the board responded to
presentations they liked by getting out of their chairs and clapping. As
Apple’s Phil Schiller recalls, that was like a parent showing his appreciation
for a child.

Bruce Chizen, a software developer at Claris, remembers observing Bill’s
easy-going way of talking to colleagues in the elevator or cafeteria. Mimicking
this didn’t come naturally to Bruce, but then he realized how little effort it
actually took once he got into the habit. Simply remembering names and asking
“how’s it going?” or “what are you working on?” was more than enough to start
building personal connections with his coworkers.

# Bias can prevent top talent getting a hearing, so it’s important to bring everyone to the table.

In the 1980s, when Bill was first starting his Silicon Valley career, most
executives at tech firms were men. One of the few women in a senior position at
the time was Deb Biondolillo, Apple’s head of HR in the US.

Bill had noticed that Deb always chose a chair at the back of the room rather
than at the conference table at the company’s weekly staff meetings. He asked
her what she was doing all the way back there and told her to “get to the
table!” One day, Deb finally took the plunge and grabbed a front-row seat.
That’s when gruff executive Al Eisenstat sat down and asked her what she was
doing there. Deb nervously told him she was waiting for the meeting. He eyed
her suspiciously and then turned to Bill, who subtly indicated that he’d made
the call. That, she recalls, was the moment she knew things would work out.

Bill’s methods might have been unorthodox, but he was the greatest champion of
bringing women to the boardroom table the authors have ever encountered. They
put this down to his old sports instincts. As a coach, he had intuitively
understood that winning is about selecting the best players, whoever they are.
In the boardroom, that meant putting more women on the team.

He wasn’t wrong. Take a study published in the journal **Science **in 2010
which examined the “collective intelligence” of teams. Why, the authors asked,
are some groups smarter than others? They narrowed their answer down to three
factors. First off, higher IQ teams allow everyone to participate, rather than
being dominated by one or two voices. Secondly, they display greater emotional
intelligence. And, finally, they have more women!

Unfortunately, there’s still a lot more work to be done before women achieve
equal representation in the tech world. According to the 2016 US Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, just 20 percent of tech executives are
women. The 2018 Entelo **Women in Tech **report, meanwhile, puts the figure at
just 10 percent. So what can today’s business leaders do?

Well, one of Bill’s favored approaches was to encourage mentoring programs.
When Shellye Archambeau became CEO of the risk management software company
MetricStream, she founded a group of senior women executives to support each
other. Bill often attended their meetings to listen and ask questions. As he
saw it, groups like Shellye’s are a brilliant way to share experiences and give
members new opportunities.

**“To truly include everyone, everyone needs to be at the table**.”

# Trust is the most important currency in the boardroom.

In the previous blink, we saw how Bill helped Deb Biondolillo get a place at
the table. The reason he could persuade Deb to grab a seat next to an
intimidating executive and Al Eisenstat to accept this was simple: they both
trusted him.

But what is trust? Well, here’s how an influential 1998 article published in
the **Academy of Management Review **journal defines the concept: trust is all
about a willingness to take a chance because you have **positive expectations**
for someone else’s behavior. And that’s often what makes boardrooms tick.

Take an example from Bill’s time working with the software company Intuit. The
board was split between two factions. One wanted to write off recent losses and
focus on long-term growth. The second, led by Bill, believed that tolerating
short-term operational failures meant there wouldn’t be a long term. The
deadlock was broken when Intuit’s head of sales, John Doerr, argued that they
should back the coach. Why? He’d earned their trust.

Bill’s method of earning people’s trust was simple: listen! Google computer
scientist Alan Eustace calls Bill’s approach **free-form listening**. Rather
than fidgeting with his phone or anticipating the moment when he could get his
two cents in, he focused his full attention on what people were saying. More
importantly, he asked questions.

That, as a 2016 **Harvard Business Review **paper argues, is something all
great listeners do. Practitioners of this kind of respectful inquiry are
regularly regarded as the most trustworthy and valuable conversation partners
because of their ability to trigger spontaneous insights. This, in turn,
heightens the speaker’s feelings of competence, belonging and autonomy.

But trust isn’t just great at diffusing boardroom standoffs – it also
transforms disagreements into positive rather than toxic experiences. When
trust is absent, your feelings can get in the way of objectivity, and
criticisms of your ideas feel like personal attacks. Once that happens, it’s
highly unlikely that you’ll give a fair hearing to the potentially valuable
insights of your sparring partner.

When you trust people, by contrast, you focus on the issues at hand rather than
taking things personally. And as the authors know from their own experience of
working in a company molded by Bill’s philosophy, the best answers usually
emerge when you talk things out honestly.

## What to read next: How Google Works, by Eric Schmidt and Jonathan Rosenberg

Bill, as Eric Schmidt and his coauthors are quick to point out, was the secret
ingredient that gave Google its edge. It was his careful guidance and coaching
which helped its leaders transform the company from just another Silicon Valley
start-up into the global behemoth it is today. But what about the other
ingredients?

Well, that’s just what Schmidt and Google’s former senior vice president of
products Jonathan Rosenberg set out to explain when they created a confidential
slideshow to explain the company’s philosophy to its senior workers back in
2010. Realizing that keeping that knowledge secret went against Google’s ethos
of openness and transparency, the duo decided to share their recipe for success
with the world. Interested in Google’s secret sauce? Then take a look at our
blinks to **How Google Works**, by Eric Schmidt and Jonathan Rosenberg.

Source: [Blinkist: Trillion Dollar Coach by Eric Schmidt, Jonathan Rosenberg and Alan Eagle](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/trillion-dollar-coach-en)