# Radical Candor

> By using radical candor, you can become the best possible boss. Radical
> candor helps you listen and express genuine care for your employees. It also
> allows you to directly challenge your staff members in a constructive way to
> which they’ll be receptive. This makes leadership a collaborative and
> personal process that brings out the best in everyone.

## Final summary

Actionable advice: **Have a growth plan for your employees**.

Don’t just think of your staff as people who are only there to do what you
assign them to do. Think of them as individuals on a career path and work with
them to develop a plan that keeps that career on track.

[Blinkist Source](https://www.blinkist.com/books/radical-acceptance-en?r=1&st=radical%20)
![radical candor](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5aa7cc0cb238e100071c837b/3_4/470.jpg)

## What’s in it for me? Be the kind of leader who cuts through the bullshit.

- why a fear of hurting people can create the most suffering; 
- when and why it’s OK to fire someone; and 
- how ten minutes of silent listening can benefit your leadership skills.

## Develop strong and beneficial relationships between managers and employees.

Two principles: 
- a manager should personally care about their employees and 
- challenge them in their work.

First step is to become more than just a coworker by establishing personal
relationships that prove you genuinely care. This means opening up, sharing and
talking about more than just business. 

Contrary to what some may think, a good working relationship is a highly
personal one.

However, a good manager must also be willing to challenge their employees when
they’re not meeting expectations.

## Delicate balance between being direct and honest while not offending.

When Kim Scott, was first starting out as a manager for Google, she had a boss
who was brilliant at delivering feedback with radical candor.

Once, after Scott delivered a successful presentation, her boss took her aside
to give her some constructive criticism. 
- she began by honestly complimenting Scott’s performance and the way she
  handled the questions from the audience.
- Only then did she bring up the criticism, which was about Scott’s habit of
  saying “um . . . ” too often. 

She made her point clear while managing to compliment Scott at the same time,
and the author was soon working with a speech coach to become even better at
her job.

Scott’s boss didn’t let the overall success of the presentation discourage her
from pointing out how it could have been even better. 

And she didn’t wait to provide feedback, either, which allowed Scott to
immediately improve her performance.

Her boss was honest and direct about both the positive and negative aspects of
the work, and she didn’t sugar coat anything.

This ensured that Scott got the point and didn’t mistake it for a personal
attack.  

## Avoid the pitfalls of overly aggressive, lazy and fearful management.

Being honest and direct does not give you the right to be obnoxiously
aggressive.

Radical candor is about expressing care for your staff, as well as being open
and direct. 

Behavior traits that a successful boss should avoid are **manipulative
insincerity** and **ruinous empathy**.

Manipulative insincerity  often stems from the manager being lazy.

For example, if an employee gives a poor presentation, a manager with
manipulative insincerity may respond by saying it was adequate. They’ll do this
because it’s easier than getting into a discussion about what needs to be
improved.

A manager with ruinous empathy, on the other hand, will avoid conflict not out
of laziness, but rather out of a misplaced fear of hurting an employee’s
feelings. Yet the result of ruinous empathy is that the employee will only
suffer more due to a lack of improvement.

So if you truly care about an employee, being honest is always in their best
interest.

## Bosses shouldn’t manufacture a false meaning for a job ... They should provide professional development.

Being radically candid means that you’re honest and don’t sugarcoat things to
motivate your employees.

Having a job with meaning and a noble purpose can inspire employees to perform
to their best ability, but it’s not up to you to manufacture that meaning and
purpose when they’re not there. Doing so can backfire and make matters worse.

There’s no use dodging the fact that some jobs have only one reward: earning
enough money to pay the bills and live comfortably. So be honest.

To do this honestly, you’ll need to spot the difference between a superstar and
a rockstar.

Superstar employees need to be challenged and permitted to grow quickly so they
can move up the corporate ladder and reach their full potential.

Rockstar employees offer a steadier presence, and they will be great as long as
they’re given the stability and time to excel at the job they’re given.

## Firing someone is a troubling experience, so be sure to take every consideration before it happens.

Consider three main points before a firing takes place.

First of all, every effort should be made to help the employee improve their
performance. 

Second, you need to consider the effect a bad employee has on the overall team. 

The third aspect to consider is an outside opinion. If you have any doubts,
it’s good to bring in an impartial third party and get their opinion on the
matter.

## Managers shouldn’t tell people what to do; instead, they should practice collaborative leadership.

Steve Jobs knew he could be wrong, so he relied on his team to speak up and
challenge him when they disagreed with his ideas.

On at least one occasion, Jobs was furious when an employee gave up and let him
win an argument because it later turned out the employee was right. 

The first step is to really listen to what the people in your team have to say. 

The second step is to give your team the time and space to develop their ideas. 

The third step is to allow for healthy debate so that the best ideas are
presented and agreed upon.

The final step is for you, the manager, to persuade other company executives
that your team’s idea is worth pushing forward. Then it’s up to you to execute
the idea and make sure everyone gains valuable insight from the results.

This process gets repeated over and over again.

## Depending on your personality, you can listen quietly or loudly.

There are two ways of listening, and you should practice the one that suits
your personality.

On the one hand, there is quiet listening, which suits leaders who prefer to
let others do the talking.  e.g. Apple CEO, Tim Cook. He’s notorious for using
painfully long stretches of silence to get others talking.

If you’re practicing quiet listening, you should spend at least ten minutes of
an hour-long conversation patiently listening to what the other person has to
say.

Loud listening, on the other hand, is good for leaders with a more
confrontational personality.

This was how Steve Jobs listened. He would make a strong statement and insist
that others provide an equally strong response to keep the discussion going.
Since loud listening pushes people into talking, it is an effective way to draw
shy employees out of their shells.

However, you will need to instill confidence in your teammates if you want them
to speak up. For this to happen, you’ll need to respond positively to their
opinions, even if you don’t agree with them, so that they’ll continue to speak
up and challenge your ideas.

## To support your employees, have honest discussions that reveal their true motivations.

Managers should support the dreams of their staff and help them approach those
dreams in a realistic fashion.

To do this, you must first talk (and listen) to your employees so that you
understand their aspirations, and they know that you are personally invested in
helping them get on the right path.

To understand your employees’ dreams and identify those important motivators,
use one of three kinds of conversations.

The first is the life story conversation where the employee tells you
everything leading up to the present day, and you try to find their motivating
factors.

The second is the dream job conversation, where they describe their biggest
career desire.

The third is the 18-month plan conversation, where they look into the immediate
future, and you identify everything that can be done to keep them on the right
track.


## Suggested further reading: How to Be a Positive Leader by Jane E. Dutton and Gretchen M. Spreitzer

How to Be a Positive Leader examines cutting-edge research from the field of
positive organizational behavior, in which companies aim to foster both a
positive attitude to work and high performance among employees. The research is
complemented with vivid examples from real organizations.

Got feedback?

We’d sure love to hear what you think about our content! Just drop an email to remember@blinkist.com with the title of this book as the subject line and share your thoughts!

