# Playing with FIRE (Financial Independence Retire Early)
*Scott Rieckens*

Playing with FIRE (2019) takes a look at the growing movement known as FIRE, or
Financial Independence, Retire Early. With a detailed account of the author’s
own life-changing journey and examples of diverse FIRE devotees, it reveals
ways in which you can change your spending and investing habits to pursue your
passions and live a more meaningful life.

Source: [Playing with FIRE (Financial Independence Retire Early) by Scott
Rieckens](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/playing-with-fire-financial-independence-retire-early-en)
![Playing with FIRE (Financial Independence Retire
Early)](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5cac57436cee070008bd5436/1_1/470.jpg)

## Final summary

Whether you decide to move your family to a cheaper town or just cut down on
your trips to Starbucks, taking control of your finances with FIRE is an
empowering move available to anyone. Though you can use aggressive savings and
low-cost investments to retire in a relatively short span of time, FIRE is more
broadly about aligning your consumption habits with your values to get the most
out of life.

## Actionable advice:

Join an online forum to discuss your finances.

For most people, finances are a taboo discussion topic. One survey by Wells
Fargo even found that money ranked over death and politics as the number one
most-challenging conversation topic. As a result, the path to FIRE can be an
isolating experience with or without a partner. The FIRE community, on the
other hand, champions collaboration and honesty. If you are unable to attend a
FIRE conference in person, there are plenty of online forums that you can
easily join anonymously.

## What’s in it for me? Join the path to early retirement and living a more meaningful life.

Like many Americans today, ever since graduating from college, Scott Rieckens
had been overworking himself in order to afford a luxurious lifestyle he
thought he needed.

Then, driving to work one day, he heard a podcast interview with financial guru
Mr. Money Moustache about the FIRE movement. This changed Rieckens’ life. FIRE,
or Financial Independence, Retire Early, is a community devoted to combining
aggressive savings and low-cost investments to buy back their most precious
resource— time.

Within five months, Rieckens had left his job, cut his family’s expenses in
half and set out to make a documentary about the journey. Two years later, he
is just nine years from retiring, the documentary **Playing with Fire **is
finished, and he has written a book in the process.

These blinks reveal hacks for making the most of your finances so you can focus
on what you really care about. As we’ll see, FIRE converts have used their
newfound financial independence to do many things, including retiring early,
making flexible career choices, pursuing passion projects and simplifying their
lives. And best of all, the FIRE lifestyle isn’t only for wealthy people and
doesn’t even demand extreme devotion; it’s for anyone who wants to live a more
intentional life.

In these blinks you’ll find out
- the optimal price to pay for a car;
- why investing all your savings in the stock market isn’t as dangerous as it sounds; and
- why FIRE doesn’t have to mean cutting out your Christmas shopping.

## Scott Rieckens felt trapped by his unsustainable lifestyle, until he discovered FIRE.

Most people work until their mid-sixties. They see it as the normal thing to
do, because without the security of a full pension, early retirement may be an
inconceivable notion. But when you take a look at what people are working
**for, **something doesn’t add up.

Whereas consumer culture demands that people overwork themselves for
unnecessary luxuries, FIRE advocates a frugal lifestyle, freeing up valuable
time for focusing on the important things in life.

In 2016, the author, Scott Rieckens, took a job as a creative director to
bolster his family’s “perfect” beachtown lifestyle in Coronado, California. At
the same time, he and his wife Taylor felt they **needed **luxuries like their
expensive Vitamix blender or eating out on a nightly basis.

With a combined annual income of $142,000 after taxes, the couple felt that
they were doing well enough financially that they could afford these luxuries.
And besides, weren’t they contributing to their 401k retirement accounts all
the while as well?

However, there were other major expenses looming in their future. The couple
wanted to buy a house and start saving for their newborn daughter’s college
fund. As the author realized how insufficient their $10,000 in annual savings
really was, he began to despair. Would he have to stick to his new salaried
position for the rest of his career just to afford these necessities? This
would also mean foregoing his entrepreneurial dreams. With no plan, he and his
wife would need a big break if they wanted to change their situation.

Driving to work one February morning in 2017, Rieckens heard an interview with
Mr. Money Mustache on his favorite podcast, **The Tim Ferriss Show. **Mr. Money
Mustache, a Canadian blogger whose real name is Pete Adeney, retired near
Boulder, Colorado when he was just thirty. Since then, he has developed a cult
following of people looking to make financially savvy lifestyle choices so they
too could retire decades early.

These “Mustachians” are part of a growing movement called FIRE, which stands
for Financial Independence, Retire Early. Using a simple online retirement
calculator, Scott Rieckens found that if he and his wife cut their expenses in
half and invested their savings, they would actually be able to retire in just
10 years.

That day, he realized that he didn’t need a big break; he needed to change his
lifestyle.

## Financial independence affords you the flexibility of not having to work for money.

You might now be thinking that retiring early will be **boring.** But in fact,
most people who achieve financial independence through FIRE aren’t actually
“retiring” in the traditional sense of the word.

Financial independence means having enough wealth that you no longer need to
work to cover your expenses. But FIRE can make all kinds of flexible career
choices possible.

For example, in 2005, Sylvia had just finished law school and landed a job at a
law firm in New Orleans when Hurricane Katrina devastated the city. In the wake
of the flood, Sylvia got rid of any possessions that wouldn't fit in her car
and prepared to start again somewhere else. Her spending habits were already
reasonable by normal standards, but the experience made her aware of how
quickly material possessions could disappear.

As a result, she was motivated to adopt a frugal lifestyle; she reduced her
grocery expenses to $50 a month and worked as a delivery driver on the weekends
to supplement her income as a lawyer. Once she was free of her student loan,
she continued these habits even as her salary grew.

Now Sylvia is 38 years old and six years into financial independence. But she
hasn’t stopped working; instead, FIRE has given her the freedom to take a
chance on starting her own law firm.

Other people have used FIRE to travel, do charity work or pursue their creative
passions. At the end of the day, what you do with your financial independence
is up to you.

But, you may now be wondering, how much money does this actually require?

Let’s take a look at the math. According to the FIRE Formula, you can reach
financial independence by saving and investing in total twenty-five times your
annual expenses.

The Rieckenses thought they could cut their expenses down to $60,000 a year,
meaning that they would need to save $1.5 million in order to retire. If they
invested their savings, they could expect at least a five percent rate of
return, earning them $75,000 per year.

And according to a study by Trinity University, they could even survive market
slumps and inflation by following the “4 percent rule.” By withdrawing a
maximum of four percent of their $1.5 million each year – the $60,000 they had
budgeted for their expenses – they could build up a buffer by saving the extra
one percent of returns left over. This way, in the long run, their principal of
$1.5 million should not dwindle. In other words, they could live off of those
savings for eternity!

Now all the author had to figure out was how to cut down his family’s spending
to the projected $60,000 per year.

## The key to FIRE is to save aggressively and make low-cost investments.

As we’ve seen, the math behind financial independence is simple: you just need
to trim your expenses and build up enough assets to be able to live off the
returns. Now it’s time to break down your finances.

The first step is to track where every dollar of your money is currently going.
Figure out how much you spent and saved in the past year, and then you can
start making adjustments. The general goal in FIRE is saving and investing
around 50 to 70 percent of your income. If this seems daunting, an easy way to
reduce your spending and save more of your income is to first focus on the
largest expense categories: housing, transportation, and food.

Five weeks after Scott and Taylor made the decision to pursue FIRE together,
they set off for a year of travel. In addition to staying with their parents to
save money, the idea was to find a more affordable city in which to settle. And
in Bend, Oregon, with its plethora of outdoor activities, highly rated school
districts, and three-bedroom houses around the $350,000 price mark, they
immediately felt that they had found their new home.

Then came the transportation question. Since Scott planned to cycle to work,
they decided they only needed one car. But what kind of car is FIRE friendly?

Brandon, the blogger behind the FIRE blog Mad Fientist, advised the couple that
while a leased car has a depreciating value, a reliable, used car in the $5,000
price range could last a decade without substantial depreciation in value.

However, finding a suitable $5,000 car proved challenging, since they needed an
all-wheel-drive for the mountainous turf around their new home. In the end,
they compromised and purchased a used AWD Honda CRV for $7,500.

Then it was time to make the most of their savings. When the Rieckenses started
pursuing FIRE, they were new to investing. They didn’t feel comfortable
investing everything they had into the stock market, so they split their
savings among three things: low-cost index funds, real estate, and
entrepreneurial projects.

Low-cost index funds use algorithms to buy up stocks across the market. Since
the value of the overall stock market usually increases at a pace of around ten
percent per year, investments into index funds should behave roughly
accordingly. Index funds are dirt cheap, which is great because you don’t want
fund management fees eating up your returns. What’s more, they are generally
considered to be one of the most profitable approaches to investing – just ask
business magnate Warren Buffett, who recommends them as a more profitable
alternative to paying a money manager.

If the inevitable fluctuations of the stock market make you nervous, you can
always adjust your savings goals and withdrawal rate to something you’re more
comfortable with. In practice, this means either working longer before retiring
or reducing your expenses further.

“**As long as you’re saving, you’re making progress, but the key to FIRE is saving money at a high or accelerated rate**.”

## Broach FIRE with your partner by discussing your values first, and connect with the FIRE community to find more kindred spirits.

Now that you’ve caught FIRE, so to speak, you’ll naturally want your friends
and loved ones to share your enthusiasm. That’s especially important if you’re
asking a partner to commit to this new lifestyle with you.

If you aren’t sure whether your partner will be receptive to FIRE, try having
him or her complete the author’s “Ten Things Exercise.”

For weeks after the author discovered FIRE, he delayed bringing up the topic
with his wife Taylor; he was afraid that she would think it was just another
one of his short-lived entrepreneurial obsessions. Also, he recognized that she
was the bigger breadwinner in their home; suggesting that she should forgo the
luxuries she chose to spend her money on could have easily ended in a fight.

One day, he suggested that she write down the ten things that made her happiest
on a weekly basis. To his delight, he found that her list was uncannily similar
to his own, which he had drawn up earlier. And while they had both noted down
things like spending time with their daughter and being active outdoors,
neither list included the beach life into which they had invested so much
money.

Now, when the author told Taylor about his obsession with FIRE, he had her
attention, because it was clear that their current spending pattern did not
reflect their values.

When it comes to sharing your plans with friends, however, you might want to
avoid being too dogmatic or preachy. Though your friends might benefit from
your new financial insight, FIRE can often be a lot for people to swallow.
Instead, a better bet to find people who are similarly inspired and will join
you on your journey is to get involved with the FIRE community.

Around the time they set off traveling, Scott’s idea for a FIRE documentary
began to garner attention. He received an email from Travis Shakespeare, a
senior vice president at BBC Worldwide and FIRE convert who was interested in
directing the project. Within weeks, a crew had been assembled to follow Scott
and Taylor on their journey.

Thanks to the making of the FIRE documentary, Scott and Taylor met many of the
leading voices in the FIRE community, including Mr. Money Mustache and hundreds
of others practicing the FIRE lifestyle. Approaching a four-day Camp Mustache
retreat where the crew was set to film, Taylor expected a cult-like atmosphere.
Instead, she found a diverse group of people with whom she felt at home.

As we’ll see in the next blink, enthusiasm for FIRE is determined by a set of
shared values that attract a diverse range of people.

## FIRE is for people of all income levels, and it can be as flexible as you want it to be.

If you don’t have a six-digit salary, you might be wondering if FIRE is just a
trend for wealthy people. After all, how are you going to save twenty-five
times your annual expenses if you don’t earn very much in the first place?

While it might get you to financial independence more quickly, a higher income
is by no means necessary to practice FIRE.

Take Kalen, a 26-year-old management analyst from Evans, Colorado. She was
starting to experience what some have called “millennial depression,” as the
prospect of working until her mid-sixties made her feel tied down and
unsatisfied.

Around the same time, Kalen became interested in investing. Her boyfriend
Kyle’s mother recommended a few FIRE blogs as a starting point, and the rest is
history.

With a combined income of under $50,000, Kalen and Kyle have been practicing
the FIRE lifestyle since 2016. With their annual expenses reduced to $32,000,
they are now set to reach financial independence in six years. But they aren’t
just pursuing FIRE to retire early.

Whether you achieve financial independence in five or thirty years, the heart
of FIRE is valuing happiness over materialism. That’s a choice available to
everyone– regardless of your income bracket.

Another big stumbling block for many when it comes to FIRE is how extreme it
sounds. Though some FIRE converts do go to extreme lengths to save money, your
approach to FIRE can and should be flexible.

The author and his wife learned this the hard way while they were staying with
Scott’s parents in Iowa. When December rolled around, they realized to their
horror that they hadn’t budgeted for Christmas. Spending their usual $1,500 on
the holiday clearly wasn’t an option. But scrambling to turn what was left of
their $150 “shopping budget” into presents for the whole family was futile.

Suddenly, their new frugal lifestyle was feeling like a frustrating burden –
but FIRE is about making choices that afford** long-term **happiness. They
didn’t have to wait for financial independence to enjoy their lives!

In the end, they found a FIRE-friendly way to solve the Christmas problem. They
gave their toddler Jovie secondhand books, which she loved, and bought their
nieces new presents so as not to ruin the celebrations with their new
lifestyle. They also decided to forgo gifts for friends.

By the time they settled in Bend, Scott and Taylor had cut their spending down
to $60,000 and were nine years away from financial independence. But that
Christmas in Iowa helped them realize they didn’t always need to be frugal;
they just needed to be intentional in how their spending reflected their
values.

“**We were reminded that any frugality that causes harm and stress to our lives does not qualify as a principle of FIRE.**”

### What to read next: Unretirement, by Chris Farrell

As you’ve just learned, early retirement is becoming more popular than ever
before. But why is this only happening now? Well, a part of it has to do with
how society’s views on work, community, and money are shifting.

In **Unretirement, **Chris Farrell highlights how conventional early retirement
is becoming a less and less viable option for most people. Alternatively, many
older workers are going into “unretirement,” or forging themselves new careers
that energize them and benefit the world at large. To find out how the baby
boomer generation is behind this, read our blinks to **Unretirement. **

