# Money

*by Rob Moore*

Source:
[https://www.blinkist.com/books/money-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/money-en)

![Money](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5dfcbc466cee0700087f97cc/3_4/470.jpg)

(2019) is for everyone who spends their life working hard for
money instead of having money work hard for them. These blinks
provide a blueprint for financial independence and enduring
wealth. They explore how your ingrained attitudes toward money
may be holding you back and set out simple formulas to help you
master your finances. 

## Final summary

Everyone can learn to master money and create great wealth for
themselves. You just need to understand the rules: how money
works and how you should plan your life to ensure that you
maximize your earning and wealth potential. In practice, that
means being protective of your own time while leveraging other
people’s, unlocking the power of compounding, and setting
prices at a level that means real profit for you.

## Actionable advice:

**Record and track your net-worth. **

Understanding and tracking your net worth is an essential first
step to money mastery. Create a spreadsheet listing the value
of all your assets – physical, cash, or otherwise salable items
you own – and compare them against your expenses – any debt or
financial liabilities in your name. Now you know your exact
wealth and can start to track it, analyze it, and plan for the
future. 

## What’s in it for me? Learn how to master money and achieve financial success.

Are you truly happy about your finances? 

If the answer is no, then these blinks are for you. Too many of
us are dissatisfied with our money, worrying about our income,
our savings, and our investments. But there’s no reason why you
can’t take charge of your financial situation and change it for
the better. All you need is the right attitude – and the
insights of a self-made millionaire on some simple strategies
for mastering money. 

These blinks will give you both. They explain how you can make
your money work hard for you, rather than the other way round.
There’s plenty of money out there – you just need to reach out
and grab your fair share of it. Using simple, easy to
understand formulas, these blinks provide a blueprint for
reshaping your approach to income and wealth so that you can
achieve more from less. 

In these blinks, you’ll learn 
- how much money there is in the world; 
- what a water lily has to do with your investments; and
- why it’s so important to understand how much you really earn
  each hour. 

## There’s absolutely no reason why you can’t be a millionaire if you have the right attitude. 

There were 35 million millionaires in the world in 2017. That’s
not a small number. So why shouldn’t you be one of them? 

Millionaires come in all shapes and sizes, from rock stars to
inventors, horse-whisperers to Slinky sellers. What they have
in common is that they’ve all found a way to turn their
personal wealth – their abilities, skills, or passions – into
financial wealth. Even if you don’t quite believe it yet, you
can do the same.

A lot of us are held back from mastering money because we
believe some common myths about wealth. 

One is the idea that money won’t make you happy. Well, the
author wants you to know something: **it absolutely will.
**Money gives you the ability to do things that will make you
happy. The best things in life may well be free – being in
love, spending quality time with your children, experiencing
art or nature. But if you want to experience these things, you
need a form of income that doesn’t rely on you working, so you
have some time for them. The idea that everything great in life
is free doesn’t make sense if you’re stuck in the office for 60
hours a week. 

A second attitude to abandon is the common grumble that there’s
just not enough money out there. The author used to buy a lot
of designer clothes from a local shop. Once, at the height of
the recession, he popped in for a browse. When he asked the
owner how business was going, he received a grumpy reply. “No
one’s got any bloody money,” the owner grouched. 

But the reality is, the global economy is awash with money by
whatever measure you choose. According to former Bank of
England chief Mervyn King, there’s £80 trillion in the global
economy and £150 to £180 trillion in stocks and bonds.
Meanwhile, estimates suggest that there’s $8.2 trillion of gold
out there. Even for modern crypto-currencies, you’ll see that
there’s around $38 billion in Bitcoin alone. 

Put simply, there’s easily enough money in the world economy
for you to be a millionaire. So if you are stuck moaning about
the lack of money out there for you, dump that attitude right
now. You need to embrace an abundant view of money. 

There’s loads of money out there. Are you going to take your
fair share? 

**“Not in the last decade have I ever heard a millionaire or
billionaire say that their money doesn’t make them happy.”**

## To start mastering money, embrace the VVKIK formula. 

Some people have a grand vision but no grasp of details. Others
sweat the small stuff but have no overall sense of where they
are going. 

Well, if you want to master money, you need **both**. And the
good news is, there’s a simple system that will help you to do
so. **VVKIK** stands for **Vision**, **Values**, **Key result
areas**, **Income-generating tasks**, and **Key performance
indicators**. 

Your vision and values will help guide you toward what you want
to achieve in life and how you want to achieve it. It may help
to write both down, listing your ultimate goals, and the values
that matter to you, from success to family, growth to freedom.
A quick tip for attracting more money is to simply shift
money-based values up your list and ensure your life vision is
financially focused. 

Next up, determine your **KRAs** or **key result areas**. These
are the high-value areas on which you should focus to achieve
your vision. Pick between three and seven areas where an
investment of time will make the most difference to achieving
your vision. These should be areas like building relationships,
marketing, or finessing business planning. Check your to-do
list or other demands on your time against your KRAs for
clarity. If someone asks you to do something that isn’t aligned
with your KRAs, don’t do it! This way, the KRAs help you stay
focused on high-value activities. 

Now take a look at your **IGTs** or **income-generating
tasks**. These are tasks that are aligned with your KRAs and
generate the best possible monetary value from your time. And
remember, not all tasks are equal. In professional golf, just
one club – the putter – accounts for 40 percent of shots taken.
This means that practicing putting will have the biggest impact
on your score. Likewise, in business, focusing on certain key
tasks that bring in money will have a disproportionate impact
on your wealth. 

Finally, develop **key performance indicators** or **KPIs**
that show what’s going right or wrong with your business or
wealth. Get your KPIs right, and you’ve got real-time feedback
on whether your KRAs and IGTs are generating the right
outcomes.

Put this system in place and your financial life will get a lot
easier. You won’t be focused on just one grand vision or on
basic tasks but on the cyclical whole, which allows you to make
more money while doing less. What’s not to like about that?

## Understand your income-generating value to make more money from less time. 

There’s a persistent myth that to be successful, you have to
work hard. Really hard. Go the distance. Make sacrifices. Man
up. Hustle. Sleep is for the weak! 

You need to abandon this idea. All too often, hard work is
absolutely **not **the right path to sustainable wealth. 

Plenty of us are earning a salary that feels good but
ultimately isn’t all that great. Why? Because when you add up
your long hours in the office and the amount of work you take
home, you are in effect working for a low hourly income simply
in the hope that in the long run, you’ll get a 5 percent pay
rise that barely covers inflation. Or maybe you are happily
working overtime, giving up much of your invaluable **free
**time to earn just a little more money. There is a better
way. 

The key to getting to grips with your time-to-money ratio is to
understand your **IGV** – your **income-generating value**. Put
simply, that’s a calculation of what an hour of your time is
worth. Once you know this, you can work out which activities
you should do yourself and which you should pay for someone
else to do on your behalf. 

You can calculate your IGV by adding up the full number of
hours you work every week. Maybe that works out at 55 hours
once you include – as you should – not just time spent in your
job but also any time put into side hustles or asset building.
**All** time devoted to money counts. Now calculate how much
you earn in a week – again, not just salary but also any income
from property, interest, share dividends, or side-hustles.
Perhaps that’s £1,000 a week. So now you know that your IGV is
1,000 divided by 55, or just over £18 an hour. 

And this tells you a lot. Because now you know that every time
a task comes up that generates more than £18, you should go for
it. This way, you are increasing your IGV. But if something
comes up that will generate less than £18, or that you could
pay someone else to do for less than £18? Ignore it or
outsource it. Otherwise, you are lowering your IGV. 

This, ultimately, is why the rich get richer. They don’t do
things that lower their overall value. Stick to this approach,
and it will change your financial life forever.

## Embracing leverage is vital for true financial success. 

Do you work for someone else? When you stop working, do you
also stop earning? If so, you are being **leveraged** to make
money for someone else. What you need to do is flip that around
and use leverage to make money for yourself. 

So what exactly is leverage? Well, it’s about making more from
less. Making more money from less time or from other people’s
time. Generating better results from less of your own effort. 

Millionaires and billionaires all understand that leverage is a
key to financial success. They find ways to maximize their
time, knowledge, resources, or skills by outsourcing tasks when
expedient. 

To do the same, you first have to learn how to leverage time.
We’ve already seen in the previous blink how important it is to
get the most out of your time. The author was once ridiculed by
his business partner for running a meeting during a haircut.
But if the author has a haircut twice a month for half an hour
each time, that adds up to 12 hours a year. And with an hourly
IGV of £10,000 – he is a multi-millionaire after all – that
adds up to a big reward on leveraged time. 

This is why it’s worth considering how you can leverage your
time. If you spend hours a day on admin, think about whether
you could outsource it at a lower cost. Make calls and write
emails while traveling. Use gym time to invest in your personal
development by listening to audiobooks. 

Secondly, you should also be leveraging money. One way is
through debt-funded property investment. For example, maybe you
buy a £1-million property with £250,000 of your cash and a
£750,000 bank loan. The bank only takes its money back, plus
interest, so any growth in the value of the property is yours.
In the United Kingdom, property prices have doubled on average
every ten years since 1952, according to the Nationwide
Building Society. So after ten years, the property is worth £2
million, and the loan has – through repayments – reduced to
£500,000. Now your initial £250,000 investment is worth £1.5
million, in just ten years! That’s the power of leverage. 

At the heart of embracing leverage is an attitude shift. Cash
poor people think, “I really need to do that,” whereas rich
people think differently. They ask, “Who can do that for me?”
Don’t ignore leverage. Make it work for you. 

**“Leverage…  is the real shortcut to success, freedom and
time-preservation.”**

## Compounding is a powerful, long-term route to wealth. 

Consider a water lily, which doubles in size every day. After
30 days, it covers the surface of the pond it’s in, however
large that pond may be. And yet, on the twenty-ninth day, it
only covers half the pond. In other words, it grows half of its
size in just one thirtieth of the time. 

That is a clue to the power of long-term **compounding**.
That’s the process by which the growth of money, like that of a
water lily, accelerates over time.  

When you receive a return on money through interest or
investment returns, that money grows more and more each year,
just as the water lily grows by a greater amount each day. 

The author once advised a reader, Matthew, on the impact of
compounding his savings, which totaled £3,600 a year. If
Matthew can get a return on his savings of two percent above
inflation, he’ll have £3,782 rather than £3,600 at the end of
year one. After ten years, he’ll have just over £43,000. Keep
going for 50 years – five times as long – and he’ll have
£438,000, almost ten times as much money. As money compounds,
it grows faster and faster. 

This has some implications for your money and business habits.
Firstly, it’s a reminder to be patient, because compounding
shows that effort early on is only truly rewarded with big
results after a long time. So even if your short-term results
are slim pickings, keep going. Imagine if Tiger Woods had
abandoned his golf career aged 18, frustrated at not winning a
major championship yet. He would have been 80 percent of the
way toward multiple victories, the long-term pay-off on his
early efforts. 

Secondly, compounding is a reminder to be careful what you
spend. That’s because every pound you spend is not just **one**
pound less in your pocket now. It’s potentially **many** pounds
less in your investment accounts in 50 years’ time. So if you
are buying a new car, for instance, consider not just how much
it will cost you today, but the opportunity cost of not
investing that money and seeing it compound over time. 

Apply this mentality and you are well on your way to thinking
like a wealthy master of money. Now let’s take a look at
something people are often scared to do but which is essential
to getting more money: putting up prices.

## Too many entrepreneurs are scared to put their prices up, but doing so could be the best decision you ever make. 

When it comes down to it, a lot of money mastery is about
setting the right price for your products and services. Too
low, and you will never achieve wealth. Too high, and sales
will fall. 

Here are a few tips to help you get your prices at a point
where they generate real profit for you while still leaving
your customers feeling like they’ve gotten a fair deal. 

Firstly, try increasing your prices, right now, by 10 percent –
an amount that won’t just cover rising inflation but also make
a little extra profit for you. If this feels intimidating or
even impossible, know that a 10 percent rise or decline in
prices is generally acceptable to most people. 

Think about** if**. If your investment portfolio jumped 10
percent, you probably wouldn’t go wild with joy. But you also
wouldn’t slump into depression at a 10 percent loss either.
You’d accept it without any strong emotion either way. So put
those prices up now because your customers will likely have the
same reaction. 

If you are still nervous about price rises, think about what
you can do to increase the sense of value your customers get.
There are several ways you could do this. One is to give a
perceived benefit to customers that actually has no or little
cost to yourself. That’s why hotels put chocolates on pillows,
and car manufacturers give out car mats when you buy a car.
Neither gesture really costs the company anything but succeeds
in making you feel that little bit better. 

Finally, don’t forget that low prices can actually put
customers off just as much as high prices can. The difference
is, while high prices put off customers with limited money,
your low prices are probably putting off wealthy customers with
plenty of money. Rich people will look at low prices and think
that the product or service is low quality. 

Put your prices up, and you’ll find that you no longer have to
bother with as many window-shoppers, bargain hunters, and
timewasters. Instead, you get to deal with wealthy people
– people with plenty of money to spend who could potentially be
a great network of new customers for you. 

So, don’t wait. Increase your prices! Don’t be ashamed or
afraid to want and ask for more money. It will buy you
happiness. 

# What to read next: Picture Your Prosperity (2015) 

If **Money** has whetted your appetite for great riches, then
why not delve further into the world of financial
self-improvement with **Picture Your Prosperity** (2015). 

These blinks provide a blueprint for anyone who has dared to
dream of wealth and financial security. They set out valuable
techniques for visualizing success, defining goals, and
executing a clear plan for prosperity. With practical steps and
helpful hints, **Picture Your Prosperity** is an essential read
for anyone who wants more. 
