# Crime in Progress

*by Glenn Simpson, Peter Fritsch*

Source:
[https://www.blinkist.com/books/crime-in-progress-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/crime-in-progress-en)

![Crime in
Progress](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5e145c7b6cee070007bd7975/3_4/470.jpg)

(2019) is the thrilling inside story of the intelligence agency that first
started investigating the links between Donald Trump and Russia. Glenn Simpson
and Peter Fritsch of Fusion GPS relate how they commissioned the infamous
Steele Dossier, which alleged that the Russians had leverage over Trump, and
the astonishing series of events to which this led.

# Final summary

Fusion GPS’s work on Donald Trump’s ties to Russia snowballed into something
that even the experienced team of investigators could never have predicted. But
Christopher Steele’s dossier contained such sensitive information that they had
no choice but to report it to the authorities. Still living with the remarkable
fallout from this today, we may never know the full picture of what links Trump
to Russia.

# What’s in it for me? Discover the inside story behind one of the great scandals of modern politics.

If Donald Trump and his Congressional supporters hadn’t sued the private
intelligence firm Fusion GPS, you wouldn’t be reading this. But the zealous
efforts that Trump’s allies made to discredit Fusion forced a lot of previously
confidential information into the public domain. It was only because of this,
that Glenn Simpson and Peter Fritsch were able to write **Crime in Progress**.

The two investigators – Fusion’s co-founders – tell the true story of their
inquiry into Trump and his ties with the Russian government. Their account
includes British former spy Christopher Steele and his famed dossier, whose
explosive accusations traveled around intelligence agencies, the media and
finally the whole world.

Beginning during the Republican primaries of 2015 and concluding after the
publication of the Mueller report in 2019, the story of this investigation
unfolds like a non-fiction thriller. It’s full of twists and turns, with one
highly unpredictable – and supremely powerful – figure at its heart.

In these blinks you’ll find out
- why Trump’s history as a developer aroused Fusion’s suspicions;
- how the shocked Christopher Steele worked to disseminate his dossier while
  protecting his sources; and
- what the authors think the Mueller report really means for American
  democracy.

# One of today’s biggest political stories began life as a small-scale opposition research report.

Collecting information on political opponents is a standard part of
contemporary politics. As election season approaches, it’s normal for private
intelligence firms to be hired to conduct **opposition research** –
investigating the backgrounds of political candidates to try and unearth
damaging material from their pasts.

But it’s hardly common for an “oppo research” report to snowball into multiple
governmental investigations. And it’s less common still for those
investigations to be focused on a sitting president and his possible ties to a
potentially hostile foreign power.

Yet that was the consequence when the small intelligence firm Fusion GPS
decided to investigate Donald Trump and his curious relationship with Russia.

Fusion GPS was founded by Glenn Simpson and Peter Fritsch, two former
investigative journalists who met while working at the **Wall Street Journal**.
At Fusion, they put their analytical skills to use in unearthing and
interpreting complex, publicly available documents – like financial records and
court filings – for a range of private clients.

Generally, Fusion didn’t work with politicians, but rather clients like lawyers
or hedge fund managers. In fact, before 2015, they had only ever worked on one
political campaign. That was in 2012, when they investigated the murky
financial background of Mitt Romney – the Republican candidate for president at
the time.

In 2015, Fusion viewed Donald Trump as a similar prospect to Romney: someone
with plenty of questionable business dealings that they would be well placed to
shed light on. So they sought a client to pay for an investigation into Trump,
and they found one in the conservative publication the** Washington Free
Beacon**. It was run by the billionaire Paul Singer – a Republican opposed to
Trump. Fusion was given a broad brief, but the aim was simple: to find
information that would hinder Trump’s bid for the Republican presidential
nomination.

Then, they got to work.

# As soon as Fusion started investigating Trump, they uncovered troubling material.

It didn’t take long for Simpson and Fritsch to realize just how much there was
to investigate. For one thing, they were startled by the sheer number of
lawsuits that Trump had been involved with over the years. Soon enough, they
began to spot a pattern among all the records.

They discovered that Trump seemed to have a habit of grandly announcing a big
development, like a new hotel, and accumulating huge investments. Later on, the
project would fail, and the investors would sue him – only for Trump to claim
that he was just a licensor, not the actual developer. The Trump SoHo project
in Manhattan, for instance, was investigated for fraud in 2011. Trump
eventually had to refund around $3 million to the project’s backers – money
Trump and his children Don Jr. and Ivanka had accumulated by exaggerating sales
figures in the project’s early stages.

Was Trump a scam artist? Simpson and Fritsch began to suspect so. Plus, there
were myriad questions regarding connections to organized crime, money
laundering, and links to Russia. Trump’s business partner Felix Sater, a
convicted felon, emerged as an early figure of interest in the investigation –
particularly due to the complex links between Russia and his company, Bayrock.
Fusion suspected that a figure close to the Kremlin was behind a $50 million
payment that Bayrock received via a mysterious company in Iceland, and that
Trump was the ultimate beneficiary of this money. 

There were plenty of other, similar cases to investigate. As Fusion followed
the research, they unearthed some highly troubling information and began to
feel a sense of urgency about their work.

Their findings didn’t manage to make much of a splash, though. Trump’s rival
candidates for the nomination largely stayed quiet on the subject of his
Russian ties, and the stories didn’t resonate with the public amid the drama of
the debates.

Even as the Fusion investigation gathered steam, Trump was surging ahead. It
wasn’t long before his nomination became inevitable, which meant two things for
Fusion: first, their work would have to continue. And second, they would need a
new client to pay for it – one who didn’t back the Republicans.

> “The more Fusion dug into Trump, the more he appeared to fit the textbook
> definition of a charlatan.”

# Working for the Democrats, Fusion hired former spy Christopher Steele – who soon discovered shocking intel.

On March 1, 2016 – “Super Tuesday” – Donald Trump won the nominations of enough
states that his eventual victory in the Republican primaries became clear. But
Fusion was determined to continue their work. Early that morning, Peter Fritsch
sent an email to a Democratic Party contact, suggesting they could help them
out with research. They eventually found a new willing client in the law firm
Perkins Coie. Their contact there, Marc Elias, was one of the most powerful
attorneys connected to the Democrats.

Elias was particularly struck by Fusion’s work on the Russia connection. There
was now the possibility that the Russians had leverage over Paul Manafort – a
political old hand recently appointed to Trump’s team as an advisor, who would
later become campaign manager.

To properly investigate all this for their new client, Fusion needed reporting
from overseas. So, in May 2016, they turned to an old contact: Christopher
Steele, a British former spy who ran his own private consulting firm, Orbis, in
London. While Fusion’s expertise lay in document research, Steele had a network
of Russian sources he could press for information.

It was Steele’s very first report that made history. The two-and-a-half-page
document released on June 20, 2016 would eventually be referred to as the
“Steele Dossier” by the press. It contained some startling information: Russia,
with the specific endorsement of Putin, had been cultivating its relationship
with Trump for five years in order to fragment the alliance of Western
countries and increase its own prominence on the world stage.

Specifically, the report alleged that the Russians had compromising material on
the prospective US president: a videotape of him watching several prostitutes
urinate on a hotel bed on which Barack and Michelle Obama had once slept.

This was what’s known as **kompromat**: material that could be used for
blackmail. It wasn’t just Manafort the Russians had leverage over – according
to the report, it could also be Trump himself.

Simpson and Fritsch were astonished and skeptical, but Steele firmly stood by
his sources. This was good intelligence, he assured the Fusion partners.

The problem was, it was **such** good intelligence that Steele told Simpson he
felt a duty to report it to the FBI. It was a question of national security.

So Steele approached an FBI contact, Michael Gaeta, on July 5, 2016. Gaeta
thanked him for the information and promised to escalate the matter. But
following that, Steele was met with an eerie silence.

# Trump and Putin’s mutual admiration became ever more obvious, and the FBI got to work.

By the time Steele informed the FBI of his research, the curious relationship
between Trump and Putin had already started to become explicit. The details of
Steele’s report were still not widely known, but the two figures’ mutual
admiration was publicly evident. On June 17, 2016, Putin said that he would
welcome a Trump presidency. In return, Trump seemed to be steering Republican
Party policy towards a more pro-Russia agenda: in July, he scotched a policy
that supported the rebels fighting Russia in Ukraine.

Equally troubling were the leaks of Democratic Party emails, the first of which
occurred on June 25, with the second following on July 22 – just three days
before the Democratic convention. Russian fingerprints seemed to be all over
both leaks. These emails caused particular embarrassment, as they showed senior
party figures’ preference for Hillary Clinton over her rival Bernie Sanders;
they swiftly led to the resignation of party chairwoman Debbie Wasserman
Schultz.

As soon as July 26, just after the Democrats’ conference had ended, Trump made
perhaps his most startling public statement yet: he explicitly invited Russia
to track down 30,000 emails of Clinton’s that had gone missing from her private
server.

Steele was so stunned by Trump’s open invitation for Russian interference that
he decided to make a trip across the Atlantic, to make sure that the FBI really
were taking his dossier seriously. This time, he met an old friend, Bruce Ohr,
who worked at the Justice Department. Ohr was shocked into action, but the FBI
were already on the case after all. They had launched an operation known as
“Crossfire Hurricane,” which would later be commonly called the “Trump-Russia
investigation.”

By early August, CIA director John Brennan was thoroughly convinced that Russia
was to blame for the Clinton email hacks, with the specific aim of aiding
Trump’s campaign. He briefed various senior intelligence congressmen and
-women, but they made the decision to keep it all under wraps.

Brennan had also contacted Russia’s intelligence agency, the FSB, with a stern
warning to stop their interference. They denied being involved, but – as a
subsequent report from Steele claimed – the Russians started to panic at this
point, having had their operation partially uncovered. Putin even fired his
chief of staff, Sergei Ivanov.

What’s more, the press were finally beginning to catch on as well.

# Despite Fusion’s best efforts, the Trump-Russia story didn’t stick in the media – unlike James Comey’s intervention.

Like Steele, the Fusion partners were becoming seriously concerned about the
prospect of a Trump presidency. So, they tried hard to force the story into the
press.

In September 2016 – when things were really getting desperate – Fusion
convinced Steele to make another trip to Washington, so that he could brief
journalists in person. Steele agreed, despite concerns about the anonymity of
both himself and his sources.

But with Steele protecting his sources, the journalists had no way to verify
his findings. The only news story that emerged from the session was by Michael
Isikoff of **Yahoo News**. His article stated that US intelligence agencies
were investigating links between Trump advisor Carter Page and the Kremlin – as
Steele had confirmed. The story did cause a stir and led to Page having to take
a leave of absence, but the news cycle quickly moved on.

That all might have changed on October 7, had it been a more conventional day
of news. That afternoon, the government finally confirmed that the US
Intelligence Community was sure that the email hacks were the work of the
Russian government, designed to disrupt the election.

But later on, two even more explosive stories broke. First, the **Washington
Post** released the now-infamous video of Trump boasting about grabbing women
“by the pussy.” Briefly, it really did look like it was over for Trump.
However, later still came the third story: another set of emails from
WikiLeaks. This time, they belonged to Clinton’s campaign chairman, John
Podesta. The story didn’t kill the **Washington Post**’s video altogether, but
its meticulous timing did take the edge off. Clearly, Russia was still doing
all it could to get its man elected.

Things got worse still on October 28, just eleven days before the election. FBI
director James Comey wrote a letter informing Congress that, due to new
information, the FBI was reopening its investigation into Clinton’s misuse of
her email account. It was a huge story – and devastating for Clinton’s
campaign.

So was a **New York Times** story that broke three days later, titled
“Investigating Donald Trump, FBI Sees No Clear Link to Russia.” In startling
contrast to the fevered coverage of the FBI’s Clinton investigation, the
**Times** suggested that the FBI’s Trump probe had come up short.

It’s often said that Comey’s intervention was the moment Trump truly won the
election. That **Times** story played its part, too.

But Fusion were more determined than ever.

> “Comey’s bombshell prompted the Fusion partners to decide they needed to do
> what they could… It was Hail Mary time.”

# When the Trump-Russia story finally got some media attention, it wasn’t in the form anyone had wanted.

The Fusion team took Donald Trump’s victory in the November 8 election hard,
but they also felt an increased sense of urgency about their work. Trump had
been elected, but this wasn’t the end of their investigation. Because it
**was** the end of their funding, though, they continued pro bono. But Simpson
and Fritsch weren’t the only ones trying to make an impact.

Similarly astounded, Christopher Steele was also determined to apply pressure.
He told his mentor Sir Andrew Wood, a former British ambassador to Russia,
about his concerns. Wood, in turn, had a discreet word with David Kramer at a
security conference later in November. Kramer was an advisor to Senator John
McCain, a senior Republican figure known for his adversarial attitude toward
Russia: the perfect person to put some pressure on the FBI investigation. Sure
enough, McCain fixed a meeting with James Comey to discuss the affair.

What Steele didn’t know, however, was just how shocked Kramer was by the report
– and how hard he would try to get the word out. After obtaining a copy of
Steele’s reporting from Fusion – for McCain’s eyes only, Fusion insisted –
Kramer began briefing the contents around Washington. Eventually, he even had a
meeting with **BuzzFeed **reporter Ken Bensinger, who managed to obtain
photographs of the dossier itself.

At around the same time, on January 6, 2017, the US Intelligence Community –
comprising the FBI, NSA, and CIA combined – released its own, official report
detailing how Moscow had worked to influence the election in Trump’s favor.
Comey had also briefed both Barack Obama, the sitting president, and his
soon-to-be successor on the Steele dossier. Trump dismissed all the allegations
as untrue.

It wasn’t the official report that made the biggest splash, but rather
**BuzzFeed**’s bold journalistic decision four days later. On January 10, the
website published Bensinger’s photographs of the dossier. Finally, the public’s
attention was focused on the remarkable extent of Trump’s Russia ties, although
naturally, the most salacious of its claims – the “golden shower” incident –
was the one that dominated the headlines.

Steele had other concerns. He had never intended for his actual reports to be
made public. This exposure meant that he now had to worry about his security –
as well as that of his sources. Lives were at risk.

# In the early days of the Trump presidency, Fusion found a way to continue investigating – as did the FBI.

Steele went into hiding once the report came out and was particularly worried
for one of his sources, who was a Russian living in the United States. On top
of those worries, Fusion was having to face an unwanted barrage of attention;
various Republicans in Congress were trying to uncover some sort of conspiracy
lying behind the troublesome dossier. Even the new president got involved,
repeatedly taking to Twitter to complain about a “witch hunt.”

Despite all this, Simpson and Fritsch resolved to continue with their work.
They set up a new company called The Democracy Integrity Project, through which
philanthropic donors could indirectly hire Fusion and Orbis to unearth more
material on Trump and his associates. The funding they received – especially
from concerned tech entrepreneurs on the West Coast – enabled them to carry on.

Fusion attempted to find more information on one-time campaign manager Paul
Manafort, still a concerning figure with dubious links to Russia and Ukraine.
They also investigated a young Russian student, Maria Butina, who appeared to
have curious connections with the National Rifle Association. They suspected
that Russia may have used the NRA to channel funds to Trump supporters.

Meanwhile, the chaotic beginning to Trump’s presidency was heading toward a
remarkable moment on May 9. Trump fired James Comey, the head of the FBI, in
what was widely assumed to be an effort to derail their investigation into his
ties with Russia.

Trump initially claimed that he fired Comey because he had done a bad job
investigating Clinton’s emails. He soon contradicted himself by admitting that
firing Comey had relieved him of “great pressure because of Russia.” To Fusion
– as well as other observers – it seemed to be clear proof that the Russians
had leverage over the president.

However, Comey’s dismissal was not the end of the official investigation into
the affair. Just over a week later, on May 17, Deputy Attorney General Rod
Rosenstein set up a special counsel investigation to carefully look at Russia’s
role in the 2016 election. In charge was former FBI director Robert Mueller: a
widely respected figure, expected to maintain political neutrality.

But this didn’t spell the end of trouble for Fusion – not by a long shot.

# Fusion faced tough legal troubles as Trump’s supporters went on the defensive.

The press was finally going wild for stories about Trump and his links to
Russia, with more and more revelations coming out. Trump’s son-in-law Jared
Kushner, for instance, had suggested setting up a secret back channel between
his team and the Kremlin. Even more scandalous was the news that Donald Trump
Jr. had agreed to meet with some Russian state officials, in order to receive
dirt on Clinton – the notorious rendezvous now known as the “Trump Tower
meeting.”

These revelations didn’t come from Fusion, though, who were busy fighting fires
on all fronts. Two congressmen were making life particularly hard for them:
Senate Judiciary Chairman Chuck Grassley, and House Intelligence Committee
Chairman Devin Nunes. Both quizzed Fusion relentlessly on their investigative
role and attempted to cast doubts on the firm’s integrity. They even insinuated
that it was Fusion, not the Trump campaign, that had been played by the
Russians.

On this last point, Grassley and Nunes were aided by a striking coincidence.
One of the attendees at the Trump Tower meeting was the Russian lawyer Natalia
Veselnitskaya. This was surprising to the Fusion partners, because they had
previously worked with her on an unrelated case: she had hired an American law
firm, for which Fusion had done some work. It was a coincidence – but one that
looked deeply suspicious for Fusion.

Simpson was forced to come before several investigative committees and faced a
legal battle over a subpoena for Fusion’s bank records. At one point, Fusion
was also being sued by Michael Cohen – Trump’s onetime lawyer and close
confidant, who seemed to have ties to the Russian dealings; he dropped the suit
shortly after the FBI raided his offices. In August 2018, Cohen ended up
turning on Trump and providing evidence for Mueller. He was eventually
sentenced to three years in prison for a range of criminal charges, including
tax evasion.

The Cohen story is typical of how Fusion and Steele’s reporting was largely
vindicated in the end. Still, Simpson, Fritsch, and Steele eagerly awaited the
results of Mueller’s investigation.

# Damning as the Mueller’s report was, it seems nothing is going to stop a repetition of the alleged 2016 election interference.

The first person to read Robert Mueller’s report – filed on March 22, 2019 –
was William Barr, Trump’s newly appointed attorney general. His gloss was that
it didn’t find Trump guilty of colluding with the Russians or obstructing
justice. But was that what the report really said?

Barr successfully managed to smother the impact of the report with his bland
conclusions – but in fact, Mueller’s report did **not** exonerate the president
at all. Rather, it confirmed a lot of what had been reported by the press,
including that Russia did indeed try to influence the election result in
Trump’s favor. While the report did not let Trump off the hook, it was far from
the cathartic conclusion many had been hoping for.

There were several reasons for this, according to Simpson and Fritsch. For one,
it was Justice Department policy that a sitting president could not be
criminally charged; that was simply beyond Mueller’s remit. Another reason was
related to the project’s scope. Mueller had been tasked with looking at
electoral interference – not the broader network of links between Trump and
Russia that Fusion and Orbis had been working so hard to uncover.

As Mueller mentioned during his testimony in front of Congress in June 2019,
other investigations into Trump and his Russian links may be continuing within
the FBI. Whatever these investigations turn up may never become public
knowledge.

However, the core claims of Steele’s dossier are now well-established. There
was indeed a strong Russian effort to influence the election in favor of Trump,
whether or not Trump was an active participant in this effort. Unsurprisingly,
the **kompromat** story has proved harder to verify.

Ultimately, the authors suggest that we should still be worried: what happened
in 2016 could happen again. Are adequate steps being taken to prevent Russian
interference in the next US election? Simpson and Fritsch caution that the
warning they sounded in 2016 is just as urgent as it ever was.

# What to read next: Russian Roulette, by Michael Isikoff and David Corn

**Crime in Progress** tells the story of how Trump’s Russia ties came to light
– from the perspectives of two investigators who were close to the material
from early on. 

**Russian Roulette** (2018) is another insider account by two investigative
reporters who were among the first to write about Christopher Steele’s
eye-opening dossier. In their book, Michael Isikoff of **Yahoo News** and David
Corn of **Mother Jones** focus closely on Russia itself, and the myriad ways in
which it interacted with Donald Trump around the time of his election in 2016. 

For an even deeper dive into the shadowy role of Russia in 2016, we recommend
our blinks to **Russian Roulette**.
