# How to Change Your Mind by Michael Pollan

Source: [How to Change Your Mind by Michael Pollan](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/how-to-change-your-mind-en/)
![How to Change Your Mind](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5b69b5afb238e10007479767/1_1/470.jpg)

How to Change Your Mind (2018) is a fascinating account of one man’s
exploration of the psychedelic drug world. Author Michael Pollan takes readers
along for the ride as he learns first-hand about the positive aspects of
psychedelic drugs, including the healing and restorative effects they can have
on people suffering from depression and addiction. Readers will also hear from
neuroscientists to learn exactly what is happening in the brain during a
psychedelic trip.

## Final summary

Psychedelics have long been maligned as substances that lead to addiction and
health deterioration. But new medical studies now confirm what ancient healers
have long known. Psychedelics can, in fact, be powerful, transformative
remedies that help cure a range of mental illnesses from addiction to
depression, or even to help people die more peacefully.

## Actionable advice:

**Take psychedelics with the support of a guide.**

Though it is possible to have beautiful, transformative experiences when taking
drugs in a recreational setting, for most people, sooner or later, this can
lead to a really bad experience, where the hallucinogenic effects of the drug
become terrifying. It is therefore highly recommended to try these substances
in controlled environments with people who have experience dealing with their
effects.

## What’s in it for me? Go on a mind-expanding trip through the world of psychedelic drugs.

Growing up, you probably heard oversimplified anti-drug messages like “Just say
no,” “Users are losers,” or “Be smart, don’t start.” In all of these messages,
any illegal drug was treated the same way, as dangerous, toxic and sure to lead
you down a terrible path in life.

Finally, scientists and lawmakers are beginning to understand what some people
have known all along, that not all drugs are the same. In the case of
psychedelic drugs like LSD, “magic mushrooms” and the South American brew
*ayahuasca*, they can even have genuine positive effects in helping people
fight depression and break bad habits.

With these big changes happening in our attitudes toward certain drugs, author
Michael Pollan decided to find out for himself what all the fuss was about. As
you’ll see in the blinks ahead, Pollan had some revelatory experiences with
psychedelic drugs, and he’s ready to tell you all about it.

In these blinks, you’ll find
- which “healer” in Mexico first introduced Westerners to psychedelics;
- what goes on in the brain during a mushroom trip; and
- why taking psychedelics is like going to the moon.

## Our perception of psychedelic drugs has changed as people understand that not all drugs are dangerous.

In 2006, the US Supreme Court made an important decision when it ruled in favor
of a small religious sect known as UDV, short for União do Vegetal. The ruling
allowed the group to import *ayahuasca*, a special tea-like brew that comes
from South America and contains strong hallucinogenic properties. While some of
the individual substances in *ayahuasca* are federally banned, the sect was
given the legal right to import and use the brew as part of its sacred and
traditional rituals.

We can now see this decision as part of a larger cultural shift in the United
States’ attitude toward drugs.

The scientific perception of psychedelic drugs has also changed significantly,
thanks in part to the neuroscientist Roland Griffiths, who is based out of the
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

In the summer of 2006, Griffiths published an eye-opening article that said
psychedelic drugs could provide meaningful, mystical experiences that
contribute to both spiritual and personal development.

Griffiths’ study was the first scientifically rigorous and placebo-controlled
experiment to be conducted in the field since the 1960s. Griffiths focused
primarily on *psilocybin*, the substance found in hallucinogenic mushrooms, and
its beneficial effects on the human psyche.

Remarkably, the study received a warm reception by the press and was even
endorsed by researchers like Herbert D. Kleber, who’d helped form the anti-drug
policies of the first Bush administration. Kleber praised the study as
promising and admired how thorough it had been.

This marked quite a dramatic shift in popular opinion. After all, psychedelic
drugs had been considered dangerous and illegal since the late 1960s – even
though this attitude was largely due to a relatively small amount of bad
experiences people had after taking the drugs in uncontrolled environments.

But thanks in part to Griffiths’ published study, the public was starting to
understand that there may be some drugs that aren’t necessarily dangerous or
toxic.

Griffiths helped make a distinction between two types of drugs: the more
widespread, hard drugs, such as cocaine and heroin, which are highly toxic and
addictive; and the traditional psychedelic drugs, such as psilocybin, LSD and
mescaline. If taken correctly, these drugs are not only safe, but they can also
be psychologically and spiritually beneficial.

In the blinks ahead, we’ll take a closer look at these psychedelics and how the
author suggests they should be handled.

## Psychedelic substances can be found organically in nature, but it takes a specialist to identify them.

With all the attention given to the negative aspects of psychedelic drugs, like
criminality and shady drug dealers, it’s easy to forget the origins of
psychedelics.

While certain cultures have known about them for quite some time, it wasn’t
until the 1950s that Westerners discovered that psychedelic substances are a
natural part of certain mushrooms.

This first discovery was made in southern Mexico when Western travelers were
introduced to mushrooms containing *psilocybin*. Of course, the region’s
Mazatec Indian tribes had been using this psilocybin for centuries, as both a
healing agent and in their spiritual rituals.

Soon afterward, in the late 1950s, Swiss chemist Albert Hoffman was the first
to artificially synthesize *psilocybin* in his laboratory.

By the end of the 1960s, the war on drugs was gaining momentum, and these
substances all became illegal in the United States. Police taskforces were
built to enforce the laws, and people were fed an image in which all drugs were
dangerous and toxic. Everyone was encouraged to forget that psychedelics are
organically found in nature and have been giving human beings – and presumably
animals – mystical experiences for centuries.

However, this doesn’t mean anyone should go foraging for psychedelics. It takes
a specialist to tell the difference between a “good” mushroom and deadly one.

One of the foremost authorities on identifying psychedelic mushrooms is the
mycologist Paul Stamets, who points out that one wrongly identified mushroom
can be a lethal mistake. In fact, the *psilocybin *mushrooms often grow right
next to the *Galerina autumnalis* mushrooms, which look virtually identical but
are extremely deadly.

Stamet has published a field guide to help adventurous foragers identify
psilocybin mushrooms in the wild. For starters, the mushroom must have gills
underneath the head, and these gills should contain purple-black or brown
spores. Most importantly, when bruised, the flesh of the mushroom will have a
bluish hue.

However, even with this knowledge, readers are strongly cautioned against
trying to identify these mushrooms on their own. The risk of making a fatal
mistake is high.

*The psychedelic, LSD, was also first found in the mushroom known as Claviceps
purpurea, a type of ergot fungus.*

## Taking LSD is best done with a guide, and the experience is not necessarily what one expects.

If you’ve taken a psychedelic drug once but didn’t enjoy it, there’s a good
chance that your unpleasant experience was due to the environment. Things like
loud music, alcohol and unruly strangers can make the experience scary or even
traumatic.

But there are some simple precautions you can take to ensure that the drugs
have a therapeutic effect and not a distressing one.

If you’re taking LSD, this is best done in a controlled and calm environment
with an experienced guide.

When the author, Michael Pollan, had his first LSD experience, his guide was
Fritz, a German man who was part of a three-day retreat that was designed to
provide the best possible experience. On the first day, Fritz guided Pollan
through a session of breathing exercises; on the second day, the actual LSD
trip took place; and on the third day, they talked about the experience.

A good guide will provide a safe and relaxing environment, as well as a
reassuring presence in case anything goes wrong. It is also recommended that
you do not take your first LSD trip with a close friend or partner, as you can
easily start worrying about what the other person is experiencing instead of
letting go of your worries and experiencing the therapeutic benefits.

What Pollan also discovered is that an LSD experience is not necessarily what
you’d expect.

Pollan’s mystical experience began with the first day’s breath work. Fritz
encouraged the author to breathe deep and fast while giving special effort to
the exhale. After doing this for some time, Pollan found that his body began to
continue breathing that way automatically. Amazingly, the author then had a
vision of himself riding a horse, and, for the first time in his life, he felt
truly and fully connected to his body. When the session was over, he’d been
breathing intensely for over an hour, and he felt absolutely radiant.

As for the LSD experience, it wasn’t some crazy trip. Instead, Pollan felt like
he was being guided through a psychological exploration of his family. During
his trip, he witnessed images from his son’s life and then his father’s life.
By the time it was over, he’d developed a new sense of compassion and love for
them both.

*“All this time spent worrying about my heart. What about all the other hearts
in my life?” *– the author, speaking aloud while under the effect of LSD.

## The mysticism surrounding psychedelics may seem hokey at first, but the experience can be truly powerful for some.

Believe it or not, Pollan felt somewhat underwhelmed after his first LSD
experience. While the trip had encouraged him to be emotionally open to others,
it wasn’t as transformative as he’d hoped.

So now he found himself ready to move on to another substance and to try a more
mystical guide. This time it was psilocybin mushrooms, and the guide was a
woman named Mary who lived on the East Coast.

At first, Pollan found all the mystical trappings related to psychedelics a bit
hokey.

Inside Mary’s house, there were lots of plants and feminine symbology. And in
the room where the trip took place, there was an altar covered in purple fabric
displaying a heart-shaped amethyst, a purple crystal candle holder, a branch of
sage, a huge mushroom and the wing of a crow. It immediately reminded Pollan of
everything he distrusted about mysticism.

Meanwhile, Mary was saying prayers that invoked spirit animals and other beings
from the natural realm. But while this all seemed corny at first, it almost
immediately changed as the psilocybin began to take effect. Now, Mary’s rituals
seemed completely natural to him as she handled her role as a guide with poise
and assurance.

Ultimately, this psychedelic experience was extremely powerful.

Having eaten the entire mushroom, Pollan had taken the equivalent to two grams
of psilocybin. This was an average dose, but it was more than he’d taken in his
LSD trip with Fritz.

Not long after the drug had kicked in, the author went to pee and found the
bathroom filled with sparkling lights. And when he urinated, the stream
appeared to be made up of diamonds.

Then, when he returned to the room with the altar, Mary’s face had transformed
into that of an elderly Mexican woman. But not just any woman – he recognized
it as the face of Maria Sabina, the Mazatec Indian healer who many believe is
the first to have given psilocybin mushrooms to Western travelers.

As the trip went on, Pollan’s ego dissolved. While he could still perceive the
world around him, it was no longer from the usual perspective of his mind and
ego. Instead, there was only an unbiased, unburdened consciousness. It was
certainly a highly transformative experience for the author, to say the least.

## Psychedelics make the brain more interconnected, which contributes to the hallucinatory experience.

Hearing someone describe unusual lights and changing faces is one thing, but
you may be wondering: What’s really going on in the brain during a
hallucinatory psychedelic trip? Are we seeing things we can’t normally see, or
just plain *seeing things*.

Neuroscientists have recently looked into the effects of psychedelics and have
found that they do cause the brain to be more interconnected.

In a 2014 study at the Imperial College in London, neuroscientist Robin
Carhart-Harris and his colleagues used *magnetoencephalography* to get a more
detailed look into the effect psilocybin has on the brain. This technique
provided the researchers with a map of brain activity that showed how different
areas interacted both normally and while influenced by the drug.

Many areas normally function more or less independently, such as the area that
handles visual recognition or the one that deals with memory. But under the
influence of psilocybin, the brain gets rewired in a dramatic fashion, and
these areas start communicating with each other.

In other words, each specialized section becomes less self-contained, and the
brain begins to function as a more integrated unit. Some neuroscientists
believe this interconnectedness is what produces the seemingly magical
experiences that occur during a drug trip.

So, when the areas devoted to memory, emotion and visual information all start
to interact, the person may start to see things differently and experience
strong emotions that are colored by memories. In the author’s case, this
resulted in a visual hallucination of his guide turning into a Mazatec Indian.

Another typical psilocybin experience that can be explained by parts of the
brain interacting is called *synesthesia*. This is when the senses fuse, so
that, for example, a sound may be perceived as a color or a shape, and a taste
may be associated with a physical sensation.

When the session is a positive one, this rewiring can lead to new insights and
ideas, some of which can be transformative. For example, if someone is trying
to break a bad habit, or if an older person is stuck in a limited way of
thinking, psychedelics can be a useful way for them to rediscover a more
flexible attitude toward life.

*“One way to think about this blooming of mental states is that it temporarily
boosts the sheer amount of diversity in our mental life.”*

## Psychedelics are also being introduced to hospitals as a treatment for terminally ill patients.

Not all hospitals are the same. Certainly, they aren’t all equipped with
state-of-the-art equipment, sterile white rooms and rows of patients recovering
in beds. At the New York City Hospital, you’ll find a very different kind of
hospital room – one that’s furnished like a cozy living room, complete with
recliners and couches.

This room is a special one, reserved for terminal patients looking to receive a
treatment of psychedelic drugs in comfort.

Research has shown that psilocybin and other psychedelic drugs can reduce
anxiety and depression in patients with a terminal disease, thereby helping
them to die a more peaceful death.

Patrick Mettes is one such patient. In April 2010, he was 53 years old and had
just ended three years of ineffective chemotherapy for a cancer that had been
affecting his bile ducts and had spread to his lungs. Entering the terminal
phase of his illness, he decided to sign up for a trial study being offered by
the New York City Hospital to test the effectiveness of psilocybin on dying
patients. These kinds of studies are still very rare. As of 2016, there have
only been two in New York City.

There were two sessions for the study that Mettes joined, one with a placebo of
niacin and one with a 25 mg dose of psilocybin.

While Mettes was on the drug, he had some remarkable experiences. In one
session, he met his brother’s wife, Ruth, who had passed away from cancer years
before. He also saw other strong female figures, including Michelle Obama, and
began to better understand how strong a mother’s love can be for any child.
Thanks to the psilocybin, Mettes felt as if he was being born again.

Even though this was a peaceful experience for Mettes, it did cause him to cry
and his breathing to become labored at times. As a result, his guides at the
hospital were worried that it might be too much. At one point, Mettes said,
birth and death were both hard work, and then he raised his legs and began
acting as if he were delivering a baby.

Clearly, it was an intense experience for Mettes, but it was also beneficial
since it allowed him to reconcile the cycle of life and death. In the end, the
results of the trial proved it to be a success, with an impressive 80 percent
reduction in the anxiety and depression of the participants.

Further trial studies have been launched to confirm these results, so we’ll
have to wait and see if psychedelic treatment becomes a widespread option for
terminal patients.

## Evidence shows that taking psychedelics can change people’s perspective on life and help cure addiction.

Here’s a question for you: What do astronauts and someone taking a psychedelic
drug have in common? No, it doesn’t have anything to do with getting “high”;
it’s about getting a new perspective on life.

During the era of NASA’s famous Apollo missions, over a dozen astronauts
traveled to the moon, and many of them have spoken of the radically
transformative experience that occurs when you’re able to see earth from a new
perspective. It suddenly seems so fragile when seen as nothing more than a
small blue orb surrounded by the infinite vastness of space.

As part of the Apollo 14 mission, astronaut Edgar Mitchell spoke of having a
deeply mystical moment when contemplating his home planet from the spaceship.
He referred to it as a *savikalpa samadhi*, an Indian term that refers to the
moment when your ego completely dissolves and merges with the infinite
universe.

Sure enough, people who’ve taken psychedelic drugs often experience a similar
shift in perspective. They’ll speak of having the realization that everything
on the planet is connected, like one living organism; or that we’re all made up
of the same elements that are in the stars – which is something we now know to
be scientifically true.

We also know that psychedelic, perspective-shifting experiences can be useful
in more ways than one. They can also help people kick an addiction.

In 2009, psychologist Matthew Johnson launched a study at John Hopkins
University to determine whether psychedelics could assist long-term smokers in
quitting.

After going through some initial cognitive behavioral coaching, participants
were then guided through a series of psilocybin sessions over the span of a
year. Along the way, they underwent regular carbon-monoxide tests to monitor
their abstinence from smoking.

While the study was small, with only 15 participants, the success rate was
huge. After six months, 80 percent had remained abstinent, and after a year, 67
percent were successful. This result is far and away better than any other
non-smoking treatment currently available.

What’s interesting is that patients who reported having more intense and
transformative sessions were more likely to stay abstinent. It’s all very
promising, but further tests are required to determine exactly why this works.

## Psychedelics can potentially alleviate depression by creating a new sense of connection in depressive patients.

If you need more proof of just how mainstream psychedelics are becoming,
consider this: in 2017, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requested a
study to see how effective psychedelics are at curing depression. After all,
clinical depression remains a widespread illness despite the efforts of
prescription pharmaceuticals.

So far, the studies show that psychedelics are indeed effective at alleviating
depression.

Some of the first positive signs came from a 2016 study by the neuroscientist
Robin Carhart-Harris at London’s Imperial College. He’d tested the effects of
psilocybin on six women and six men, all of whom suffered from chronic
depression and had attempted other cures without any success at least twice.
After one week of treatments, a remarkable 80 percent reported an improvement
in their symptoms, while over 60 percent said their depression was gone
completely.

With these impressive results, the study was expanded to include 20 people who
received a week of treatment, but this time the patients were also checked six
months after their treatments. After this longer period, the results were less
perfect, with only six patients reporting that they were still completely free
of depression. But this result may simply mean that some patients will need to
repeat the psilocybin treatments every few months to sustain the benefits.

Whatever the case may be, these early tests suggest that psychedelics could be
preferable to the pharmaceuticals currently being used, which generally call
for daily usage and often have debilitating side-effects.

Again, more studies are currently underway to see if the benefits can be
substantiated. But we already know that one of the ways psychedelics soothe
depression is by allowing patients to find a new sense of connection in their
lives.

When interviewing the participants in the Imperial College study, clinical
psychologist Rosalind Watts sought to discover what exactly had changed for
those who’d found relief.

The overwhelming response was that they’d experienced depression as a state of
disconnection – from other people, their younger selves, their spiritual
beliefs, even the things around them that they looked at and touched.

Typically, a depressive person could look at an orchid, or anything of beauty,
and fail to feel a sense of happiness or any of the positive emotions
associated with nature or beauty. But according to the patients, psilocybin
seems to have the power to reconnect them to the world and to the people in
their lives, at least for a while.

While we wait for more data and test results to emerge, we must acknowledge
that there is a potential antidote to the very dire problem of depression and
other psychological disorders that affects large numbers of people throughout
the world. What was once dismissed as dangerous may, in fact, be a key to
future happiness for those suffering.

## Suggested further reading: Chasing the Scream by Johann Hari

*Chasing the Scream* (2015) gives a riveting account of the first hundred years
of the disastrously ineffective War on Drugs. Weaving together fascinating
anecdotes, surprising statistics and passionate argumentation, Hari examines
the history of the War on Drugs and explains why it’s time to rethink
addiction, rehabilitation and drug enforcement.