# We Should All Be Feminists

*by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie*

Source:
[https://www.blinkist.com/books/we-should-all-be-feminists-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/we-should-all-be-feminists-en)

![We Should All Be
Feminists](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/56feeaaa7e4784000700002e/3_4/470.jpg)

# Final summary

Feminists are not bra-burning man haters who want to take over the world.
They are women and men who are concerned about the severe inequality that
persists between males and females in modern societies. If we are going to
create a just society for all, we need feminism now more than ever.

# Actionable advice:

## Challenge your own norms.

The next time you hear someone criticizing a woman, ask yourself if they would
be saying the same thing if the person being criticized were a man. If you feel
like it could lead to a productive and healthy conversation, ask the person
what they think. 

# What’s in it for me? Learn why the world still needs feminism.

Women’s suffrage, increased pay equality, the right to abortion through **Roe
v. Wade**: over the last hundred years, feminism has claimed a lot of victories
for women’s equality. This has led many to believe that feminism has already
achieved its goals and that there’s no longer any need for it.

But feminism is still needed. There have been some great advances in the modern
era – but as we will see, we do not live in a society where both sexes are
equal. Men are still the standard-bearers and women do not have the same
opportunities as their male counterparts. Through the author’s personal
experience of the norms and biases that lead to gender inequality, as well as a
roadmap to move beyond them, she makes a strong case for why we should all be
feminists.

In these blinks, you’ll learn
- how the word “feminism” is misunderstood;
- why women in Nigeria can’t go to clubs alone; and
- which culture once considered twins to be an evil omen.

# The are many common misconceptions surrounding the word “feminism.”

Have you ever witnessed an argument when someone used the word “feminism”? Did
you notice how people reacted?

Like many other -isms, feminism is a word that provokes a wide range of
reactions in people – and many of them are negative. In fact, feminism can
often evoke aggression and condescension.

The author experienced this when she was still a teenager – and didn’t even
know what a feminist was. When she was fourteen, she had a vigorous argument
with a close male family friend. As the argument heated up, he called her a
feminist in a way that sounded like feminists were akin to criminals.

And this wasn’t her last encounter with this attitude. At an interview to
promote her first book, **Purple Hibiscus,** the journalist interviewing her
advised her not to call herself a feminist.

Why?

Because, he said, women who called themselves feminists were jealous, unhappy
and incapable of finding a man. The author has many other similar stories, like
a time when she was told by a female Nigerian academic that feminism was a
Western indulgence, incompatible with African tradition.

But feminism is not only dismissed by people who are against it. Many people
believe that men and women should be equal, but that feminism is no longer
necessary because the sexes are **already** equal. These people believe that
women used to be oppressed but now have all the same freedoms that men do. 

One of the author’s friends had demonstrated exactly this kind of attitude. He
couldn’t understand how exactly women were treated differently – until he
witnessed it firsthand. 

One night, he and the author went out for dinner. A valet parked their car, and
she gave him a tip. But instead of thanking the author, the valet looked at her
male friend and said “thank you, sir.” In that moment, her male friend caught a
glimpse into the everyday oppression of women.

# One of the places where gender inequality is most apparent is in the workplace.

In most of the world today, there are laws giving women the right to be elected
to political office or to pursue any career they want, which is certainly a
departure from the past. But these legal measures don’t protect women from
other forms of gender-based discrimination.

One well-known example is the **glass ceiling**, the term used to describe how
the highest positions in an organization – and also the highest salaries –
consistently go to men.

This is true even in supposedly “feminine” fields like cooking, teaching or
art. Men typically occupy the top positions with titles like Head Chef or Dean
of the University. And when a woman does gain such a position, it is generally
the exception and not the rule.

This discrepancy doesn’t only exist in top positions; there is an income gap
between genders in all fields. In 2014, full-time male workers earned 21
percent more than their female counterparts for the same work. For every dollar
a man earned, a woman earned just 79 cents.

While forms of sexism like the income gap are easy to see with data, others are
more subtle – but no less real.

For example, the author had a female friend who got promoted to a high-ranking
position. The man she replaced had been admired for a strict, detail-oriented
and authoritative attitude. But when she disciplined an employee for forging a
timesheet as her male predecessor had done, she wasn’t praised; instead, she
was accused of being difficult and aggressive. 

Another friend experienced a different kind of discrimination. When she came up
with a new idea in a meeting, she was promptly rebuffed by her boss. But when a
male coworker voiced the same comment later on, he was congratulated. 

These two cases show how people hold men and women to different standards. When
men are authoritative and voice their opinions, they are respected. Meanwhile,
when women do exactly the same thing, they are criticized and dismissed, simply
because they are women.

**“The higher [in the workplace] you go, the fewer women there are.” **- Nobel
Laureate Wangari Maathai

# Women suffer socially and physically due to their gender.

Unfortunately, discrimination against women isn’t limited to the workplace. All
throughout society, women are seen as second-class citizens.

For example, women are less free to choose the lives they wish, such as when a
woman prioritizes her career ahead of having a family. While men are free to
live a life without a family, many cultures perceive women who don’t have
children as failures. And in relationships, women are often expected to
sacrifice their dreams to bear the brunt of the responsibility for raising a
child.

Furthermore, many cultures control women’s sexuality by emphasizing the
importance of virginity, using loaded words like “innocent,” “pure” and
“angelic.” This subtly limits women’s identities and desires without holding
men up to the same expectations. In fact, the reverse is often true: men are
typically praised if they are sexually promiscuous.

Women are also encouraged to behave in a way that is pleasing and submissive.
They are taught to be agreeable and attractive, because otherwise they will not
be desirable to men.

This idea that women exist only for male enjoyment runs deep in cultures around
the world. For example, when a woman in Nigeria goes to a club alone, men find
it impossible to imagine that she is there merely to enjoy dancing. 

Instead, she is assumed to be a prostitute. And rather than questioning the
male desire that fuels prostitution, women are blamed for their supposedly
irresponsible behavior. Similarly, women are taught not to wear sexy outfits,
because if they are sexually assaulted, many men will say that they were
“asking for it.”

# Men and women are different, but not in a way that legitimizes inequality.

While some people think there aren’t any differences between the genders, there
are clearly some significant differences between men and women – they just
don’t legitimize inequality.

For example, there are some obvious biological differences between the sexes.
Women can give birth and men have more testosterone. Men are also, on average,
bigger and physically stronger than women. 

Historically, these differences led to a logical division of labor between the
sexes, with women taking care of children and men doing more physical work. And
because physical strength was crucial to a group’s survival, men tended to be
societal leaders.

But we now live in a world where physical strength is no longer the most useful
survival skill. And while physical differences still exist, they are no longer
an argument in favor of gender inequality. 

In fact, our global economy depends on skills that are not gender-specific,
like creativity, intelligence and the ability to innovate. Society has evolved,
but its gender norms haven't. So why can’t women ignore these norms and pursue
their goals? 

Because humans are not independent creatures. Our social nature pushes us to
automatically internalize society’s norms and expectations. And if, for
example, positions of power are typically granted to men, this becomes a
powerfully entrenched pattern.

The author remembers one of her first encounters with this invisible norm. When
she was nine, her primary school teacher announced that the pupil with the
highest grade on a specific test would become the class captain.

The author really wanted to be class captain, and worked hard to get the
highest grade. She was delighted when she came first in the test scores, but
was shocked when the teacher made the second-highest scorer, a boy, the
captain. The teacher had assumed it was so obvious that the captain had to be a
boy, that she hadn’t even thought to mention it.

Traditional gender roles may have had their reasons for existing in the past,
but these do not apply today. We need a new normal, with more room for female
desires and rights.

# We need a cultural shift toward a society that integrates feminism.

There’s no doubt that we need to improve the relationship between the genders.
If we’re going to integrate feminism into society, we have to make a conscious
shift in both our attitudes and behavior.

One way of integrating feminism into our attitudes is to actively challenge the
conception that women must adhere to traditional masculine norms to prove their
worth.

For example, the author remembers how she was torn between wearing a suit or a
skirt on her first day of teaching. At the time, she opted for the suit,
because she thought she needed her wardrobe to be taken seriously. She has
since realized that it’s possible to be both feminine and to be taken
seriously. 

If we all want to make similar shifts, we can’t just rethink how we think about
women; we need to change our ideas about masculine norms as well. 

Indeed, society pressures men to act in specific ways as well. They are
expected to be tough and stoic – but underneath this façade, they have
weaknesses like everyone else. Women are then taught to tiptoe around these
weaknesses for fear of making men feel bad, which means that they can’t be bold
and have to stifle their negative emotions.

To improve relations between men and women, we should create an open
conversation about how we can tackle gender issues. Fundamentally, we need to
get more people actively thinking and talking about gender inequality.

First of all, we need to get people to move beyond **gender blindness**. This
is when people say that they don’t even think about gender differences, and
thus assume they are free of sexism. But the truth is that biases still exist
in any context, and we need to pay far more attention to issues of gender.

Second, we need to remind ourselves that change is possible. Cultural norms
**have** changed, so they **can** and **must** again. “It’s just our culture”
is no excuse. 

For example, the author has two beautiful twin nieces. A hundred years ago,
they would have been killed at birth, because the Nigerian Igbo culture saw
twins as an evil omen. Nowadays, Igbo people find that unimaginable. A hundred
years from now, the future citizens of the world will think the same of today’s
persistent gender inequality.

# Suggested further reading: Lean In by Sheryl Sandberg

Through a combination of entertaining anecdotes, solid data and practical
advice, **Lean In** examines the prevalence of and reasons for gender
inequality both at home and at work. It encourages women to **lean into** their
careers by seizing opportunities and aspiring to leadership positions, as well
calling on both men and women to acknowledge and remedy the current gender
inequalities.
