# The Right Side of History by Ben Shapiro

The Right Side of History (2019) is both a rousing defense of Western
civilization and a handy guide to the religious and philosophical thinking that
underpins it. It explores the centuries of thought that have helped build and
sustain the West, and seeks to understand and dispel more recent threats to
that way of thinking.

## Final summary

In today’s age, we have all but rejected the foundational values of the West –
that we are forged in God’s image, and that we are equipped with reason to
explore the world. From these notions have come science, human rights, liberty
and a belief in progress. By turning our backs on these values, our society is
descending into tribalism. We must remind ourselves why the West is great
before it’s too late.

Source: [The Right Side of History by Ben Shapiro](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/the-right-side-of-history-en)

![The Right Side of History](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5cc82bf76cee0700082212c4/1_1/470.jpg)

## What’s in it for me? A conservative’s hymn to the West.

The typical Westerner enjoys both a comfortable life and the freedom of living
in a democratic society – privileges which seemingly are taken for granted. Why
are people so unhappy? Why does so much of modern life seem infused with anger?
Why is it that Clinton and Trump supporters don’t just disagree but seem to
actively distrust and hate each other? And why is there so much anger in public
life that the author, an Orthodox Jew, is accused of being a neo-Nazi by some
on the left, and is sent anti-semitic abuse by others?

Too many people seem to have bought into the idea that the West is something
damaging or shameful, and not a huge force for good in the world. These blinks
take a step back and explore the philosophical foundations of the West, and its
focus on moral purpose, reason, scientific discovery and individual liberty.

The author reminds us that the West’s success is built on the twin foundations
of Jerusalem and Athens – the Bible and the hugely influential thoughts of the
ancient Athenian philosophers. He also argues that societies which stray from
this dual philosophical legacy are not to be desired.

In these blinks, you’ll learn
- how the Bible gave us the concepts of human equality and free will;
- why true happiness is about moral purpose; and
- why the French Revolution was a disaster.

## True happiness is derived not from pleasure but from moral purpose.

Are you happy? If not, you certainly aren’t alone. Nearly three-quarters of
Americans say they’re not confident that life for the next generation will be
better than today, according to a 2014 story in the **Washington Post**.

Why are we so despondent? Well, perhaps it’s because we’ve lost sight of what
happiness truly is. We associate it with pleasure – having sex, playing golf or
watching our children grow. But the Bible and the philosophers of Athens tell
us that true happiness comes from leading a life of moral purpose.

In the Hebrew Bible, the word used for happiness is **simcha**, meaning correct
action in line with God’s will. It is commanded to live with simcha, and
rejoice in the purpose that God has given humans. As Solomon says, “There is
nothing better for a person than to rejoice in his work, because that is his
lot.”

The philosophers of Athens took a similar view. Aristotle, for example,
developed a concept of happiness that was also about living a good life. But a
good life for Aristotle wasn’t a subjective concept that we can determine for
ourselves. For him and his followers, something was good if it fulfilled its
purpose. A good watch, to give a modern example, tells the time. And a good
human acts in line with reason, because what makes humans unique is our
capacity for reason, and our ability to use reason to explore the world.

So both the Bible and the Athenian philosophers arrived at similar conclusions.
True happiness in life comes from moral purpose, whether that is serving God
with joy, or following our moral duty as humans to pursue reason.

This may sound like hard work. Happiness, in this view, isn’t about frolicking
at a festival, but instead about living a good, purposeful life. And this more
serious approach is the only way to unlock true meaning in life.

The Austrian psychiatrist and Holocaust survivor Viktor Frankl wrote in his
memoir that those who saw no purpose in life were quickly lost. He argued that,
in order to survive, those caught up in the terrible events of World War II had
to quickly learn that what mattered was not what they expected from life. What
mattered, rather, was what life expected of them.

So now that we understand the correlation between happiness and moral purpose,
let’s take a look at what this means in practice.

## To reject the Judeo-Christian basis of Western civilization is to reject the concepts of progress, equality and free will.

In ancient Egypt, rulers were given the title **Son of Ra**; Ra being the
preeminent Egyptian god of the sun. And in Rome, emperors were regarded as
deities as late as the year 14 CE, when Emperor Augustus was declared a god as
he died.

For centuries, the inequality of man was accepted. Sons of Ra were divine and
could determine the outcome of their lives. But everybody else had to accept
the lot in life that the gods had given them. It was the Bible that gave us the
concept of human equality. This was one of the most influential developments in
the history of mankind and civilization. As the Bible states, “God created man
in his image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created
them.” All humans, not just rulers, were formed by God in his image.

Crucially, the Bible also introduced the notion that all humans have freedom of
choice, and that we can enjoy the value that this gives our lives. Indeed, the
creation story is a tale of how the very first man, Adam, used his freedom to
choose wrongly. We are all Adam’s descendants.

But it is not only the concept of free will that came from Judeo-Christian
thought. The concept of progress, on which so much of modern political thought
is based, is distinctly Judeo-Christian in nature.

In many cultures, history has no end or beginning. The Greeks, for example, saw
the universe as moving in a circle, with recurring history, and therefore no
vision of progress. And in pre-biblical pagan belief systems, when the gods
intervened in the world, they did so to further their own self-interest, and
had no desire to advance progress in the world.

The Bible’s God, however, is fully involved in driving progress. In the story
of creation, he intervenes day by day, creating more and more complexity each
time. And whenever he subsequently intervenes, it is to teach lessons or to
improve the lot of man, such as when he rescues Noah and his family.

So next time you hear a politician talk about progress, remember that the
concept owes a lot to religion.

## The philosophers of Athens gave us reason.

The Bible taught us that God raised man above the level of animals by giving
him a godly mission and moral purpose.

The philosophers of Athens, on the other hand, reinforced the idea of man’s
elevation not by association with God, but through man’s own capabilities. The
Athenian philosophers’ legacy to the West was to teach that we humans, alone
and unique in the world, have the faculty of reason. We have the power to
pursue knowledge, to think logically and to explore the world.

This teaching laid the foundation for modern democracies.

Today, we take it for granted that people will think and argue about political
and governmental structures. But it wasn’t always so. It was the Greek
philosophers who, as part of their application of reason to the world around
them, started applying reason to how government works.

That didn’t always lead to democratic thinking. The philosopher Plato believed
that only the best and wisest should play a role in governing, and he advocated
the cultivation of a class of philosopher kings. But Aristotle rejected Plato’s
elitism, and argued for a form of government that was partly democratic, and
partly reliant on the experience and wisdom of the old and aristocratic, in a
kind of early philosophical attempt at a system of checks and balances.

The Athenian philosophers also created the conditions for modern science,
through their shared urge to understand the world around them.

Pythagoras, a philosopher of the sixth century BCE, believed that people could
find harmony with the universe by understanding it. His pursuit of such harmony
led him to study mathematics and to make significant discoveries such as the
Pythagorean theorem.

Other philosophers alighted on entire theories of existence. Previously, pagan
societies had largely accepted that the world was as it was, made by the gods.
But Athenian philosophers attempted to explore the world with reason, in order
to understand it better.

Heraclitus, for example, who lived between 535 and 475 BCE, developed the
concept of **logos**, the idea of a complete system of coherent reason sitting
behind the world we inhabit. These attempts to understand the world, as we’ll
see in the next blink, embodied the spirit of investigation that would
ultimately lead to the West’s global dominance in science and technology.

## Science and the rights of the individual thrived under Christianity.

Science, and all the riches and wonders it has given the modern world, is
perhaps the most celebrated of all the West’s legacies. It’s become fashionable
to believe that religion has somehow been a restrictive force on science; that
science has flourished despite Christianity. But that’s simply not the case.

In fact, before the age of Darwinism, pretty much every great scientist the
world had ever seen was religious. Take Nicole Oresme, who in the fourteenth
century discovered that the Earth rotates on its axis. He was a bishop of
Lisieux in France. Or the famous Nicolaus Copernicus, who theorized that the
Earth moves around the sun, rather than the other way round. Not only did he
serve his church as a medical adviser, but his famous 1543 work **On the
Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres** incorporated a letter to the pope at the
time, Paul III.

It is true that the Christian church grew resistant to scientific theories
about the world that emerged in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries from
thinkers like Copernicus. Most famously, the Church persecuted the scientist
Galileo for pursuing Copernican theories about the Earth revolving around the
sun. But despite this, Galileo himself never lost his belief that science was a
route to God. He, and others like him, believed that men of God had a duty to
explore God’s universe.

While science was rising in this way, so too was the belief in human freedom.
Here, the philosopher John Locke, who lived from 1632 to 1704, was crucial.
Locke believed that everyone had **natural rights**, stemming from our moral
duties. We have a duty not to steal, therefore it follows that we have a
natural right to property. We have a duty not to kill, therefore a right to
life. And as we have a duty not to oppress others, we thus have a right to
liberty.

As for governments, Locke believed that their role was to protect their
citizens’ natural rights to life and liberty. As an extension of this belief,
he asserted that governments should require consent. As such, if a government
acted against natural rights by depriving its people of property, the people
would have the right to rebel.

Locke’s thinking, and his belief that government had just three duties – to
preserve life, to preserve liberty by administering justice, and to fund public
goods – would be highly influential, as we’ll see in the next blink.

## In contrast to the leaders of the French Revolution, the Founding Fathers of America embraced the best of both Jerusalem and Athens.

The United States of America was the first country on earth to be explicitly
grounded in philosophy.

Thomas Jefferson, a coauthor of the Declaration of Independence, even said that
the document was an attempt to enshrine the brilliance of thinkers like
Aristotle, Cicero and Locke.

The declaration explicitly states that all men are created equal, a belief
built upon the Bible’s notion of man created in God’s image. It enshrines life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness as fundamental rights, building on Locke’s
thinking. And by asserting that virtue-seeking believers are vital to a healthy
society, the declaration emphasizes freedom of religion.

The founding philosophy laid the groundwork for human happiness, and enabled
the greatest gift to mankind in human history: a United States of America that
has given billions of people around the world their freedom and prosperity.

We can contrast this with what happens when societies and political leaders
cast out the West’s religious and philosophical heritage. Take a look at the
experience of revolution in France.

The French Revolution was born of a utopian desire to rid man, or French men at
least, of the old constraints of power and religion. Denis Diderot, a
philosopher whose work heavily influenced revolutionary leaders, claimed he
wished to strangle the final king of France, using the guts of the country’s
last priest.

And rather than follow America’s example by building on centuries of Western
thought, the authors of the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen explicitly rejected such wisdom.

In France, rights did not come from God or preexist government. Instead, all
authority stemmed directly from the nation. According to the revolutionary
leader Maximilien Robespierre, virtue meant nothing less than a love of France
and its laws. And its laws were very different from those in the United States.
For example, religion and free speech were only protected insofar as they did
not threaten public order.

What was the result of this focus on the people and the state, as opposed to
the USA’s focus on individual liberty and limited government? Tens of thousands
were murdered by the revolutionary regime in just two years. Another 250,000
died in a civil war that followed shortly thereafter.

The French Revolution was a disaster. But, sadly, it would not be the only
failed attempt by politicians to shun the West’s heritage in favor of a utopian
future.

> Never were stronger foundations set for human happiness than in the founding philosophy

## Efforts to prioritize the collective at the expense of individuals thrived in the twentieth century.

At the heart of the French Revolution, and the thinking behind it, was an
emphasis on the collective. Individuals were suddenly important not in and of
themselves, but only in the sense that they were members of a group. It’s an
idea which has proven dangerous time and time again, and yet it still remains
seductive for some.

The experience of Russia under communism is a bleak warning of what can happen
when the collective is elevated over individual rights.

Writing in 1917, and sounding somewhat like present-day socialist Bernie
Sanders, the Russian revolutionary Lenin called for a huge expansion in
democracy. He wanted, for the first time, a democracy for the poor. But he
openly recognized that his plans for a “democracy for the people” required a
significant curtailment of liberty for some. He promised suppression of
capitalists, saying that they must be crushed by force.

Other communist leaders were even more explicit. Grigory Zinoviev, a key leader
after the Russian Revolution, said that the communists must carry the support
of 90 million of Russia’s 100 million people. As for the country’s rich and
elite, which made up the remaining 10 million? They needed to be annihilated,
he asserted.

And while America has never suffered the horrors of the Soviet experience, it
has still experienced the harm that comes from those who enthuse about central
planning and downplay the importance of individual rights.

In the early twentieth century, many so-called progressive politicians and
thinkers proposed the sterilization of those deemed undesirable, or a burden to
society, in an apparent bid to improve humanity. Teddy Roosevelt, for example,
proposed in 1907 that those with Down’s syndrome should be subject to
compulsory sterilization.

And the founder of an organization that thrives to this day held similar views.
Margaret Sanger founded a birth control organization in 1921 that would become
the modern-day Planned Parenthood. She openly called for the sterilization or
quarantine of up to 20 million Americans. Birth control, she wrote, was simply
the process of filtering out the unfit and the defective.

In the views of the Founding Fathers, making a better world was about life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness. In the views of some communists and
progressives in the early twentieth century, creating a better world was about
living for the collective. Or, failing that, dying for the collective.

## The modern left has embraced tribal identity at the expense of Western civilization’s philosophical heritage.

Today, the author argues, the political left has abandoned truth, reason and
the pursuit of virtue in favor of victimhood, as well as an angry tribalism
that has turned normal political disagreements into something much more toxic.

We only have to look at the fashionable politics of** intersectionality** to
see these forces at play.

Kimberlé Crenshaw, a UCLA professor of critical race theory, coined the term
intersectionality in 1989. She argued that humans are members of different
groups, defined by gender, race, religion and sexual orientation. And we can
only understand the reality of an individual’s life by looking at the
intersection between the different groups she is a member of.

The more minority groups you are a part of, the more you will suffer
victimization. So an Asian Muslim lesbian experiences the world differently
than a white heterosexual Christian man, for example.

But, according to Shapiro, the true goal of intersectionality is to bully into
submission those who aren’t members of minority groups, by demanding that they
“check their privilege,” to use Crenshaw’s words. White people, for example,
must recognize the privilege that comes from being white, or be cast out of
accepted society.

Those people who fail to conform with this theory, even if they themselves come
from minority groups, are condemned. As a result, the conservative commentator
Nikki Haley is regarded as somehow not a woman, just because she holds pro-life
Republican views.

And under this modern way of thinking, science and reason take a back seat.
Some go so far as to say that science itself is a construct of privilege. Donna
Hughes of the Women’s Studies International Forum argues that scientific method
is simply a tool invented by men to support their dominant position in the
world.

Intersectional thinking is just one example of how our modern world is
descending into tribalism. Intersectionalists explain every trouble they face
in life through the prism of their tribe. On the opposite side of the political
spectrum, white supremacists find their own kind of tribal solidarity in the
movement of the alt-right.

But while tribal identity can give its members meaning, it also chips away at
the civilization that has given us freedom, rights, science, prosperity and
health. We are turning our backs on the foundations of our civilization. The
thinking of the Bible and of Athens. And on freedom, rights, responsibility,
moral purpose and scientific inquiry.

If we want our civilization to move forward, society must rediscover these
values.

## What to read next: The God Delusion, by Richard Dawkins

You’ve just read the case for traditional Western belief systems, rooted in
organized religion and the teachings of the Bible. Now, why not take in a
different account of the impact of ancient religious thought?

In **The God Delusion**, the award-winning and famously atheist scientist
Richard Dawkins argues that being good has nothing to do with religion, and is
instead a simple by-product of evolution. These blinks deconstruct the core
reasoning used to justify the existence of God, and show the sheer statistical
and logical improbability of a higher being’s existence. The author argues that
religion can, in fact, be harmful to our ethical standards, and should be
rejected as the foundation for society’s sense of morality.

