# Ethereum Henning Diedrich

Source: [Ethereum by Henning Diedrich](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/ethereum-en/)
![Ethereum](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5ab3bcecb238e10005bf57ea/1_1/470.jpg)

Ethereum (2016) introduces readers to the world of blockchains, digital
currencies and smart contracts, while paying special attention to how the
Ethereum cryptocurrency works. It provides a compelling account of where this
technology is heading, explaining both how blockchains may revolutionize
society and commerce and why Ethereum is currently the most advanced blockchain
available.

## Final summary

Blockchains are not a hype. They have real potential to bring about major
change and Ethereum is the most advanced blockchain to emerge. This is because
it isn’t highly specified, but rather a general-purpose blockchain that can be
used in a wide variety of social and commercial spheres.

## What’s in it for me? Discover what may be the superior alternative to bitcoin.

Most of us have heard about bitcoin by now. It’s just one of the many
cryptocurrencies that’ve been making headlines in recent years.
Cryptocurrencies are often touted as the next big thing in finance, but few
people really understand how they work. In fact, rather than the currencies
themselves, it’s the technology that powers them – known as blockchain
technology – that has the truly revolutionary potential.

Some people believe that blockchains offer so many benefits that they’ll
eventually render banks obsolete. Others think they also represent the future
of contracts and secure data storage. And there are still others who see all
this technology as nothing but a fad that will eventually implode.

After reading these blinks, you’ll have a good idea of what blockchain expert
Henning Diedrich thinks, and why it might be still too early to tell.

In these blinks, you’ll discover
- why b-money was just a few years ahead of its time;
- which country uses as much electricity in a year as one Bitcoin blockchain; and
- why Ethereum may surpass Bitcoin as the blockchain of choice.

## Digital currency was developed by cypherpunks in reaction to online privacy issues.

In the 1980s, the world entered the computer age, with PCs becoming part of
many homes and workplaces. To some people, however, this development was
anything but welcome. To them, it seemed to foreshadow the rise of a complete
surveillance state, not unlike something out George Orwell’s *1984*. So a
handful of computer programmers decided to fight back, and their weapon was
code.

Thus, in the late eighties, the *cypherpunk movement *began. Their main aim was
the protection of people’s privacy in the digital world.

One of the founders, the American programmer Eric Hughes, cataloged their goals
and intentions in the 1993 book *A Cypherpunk’s Manifesto*. The cypherpunks
wished to see safe, encrypted communication in the digital world; this would
allow people to make anonymous transactions. Unlike credit card transactions,
where the payer and sender can be identified, cypherpunks desired a digital
currency where people could send and receive money without being tracked – not
unlike paying with cash at the local corner store.

They took the first step toward a private communication system in 1997, by
launching the *Cypherpunks Distributed Remailer *(CDR), which was basically an
anonymous, decentralized email system. Not long afterward, came the first
version of a cryptocurrency, called *b-money*, whose invention is credited to
an individual with the online handle “Wei Dai.”

Remarkably, b-money worked similarly to how bitcoin works today: all users of
the currency held a copy of the transaction log, so that each payment was
posted for all to see and potentially approve or dispute. The big difference
between b-money and bitcoin is this: in b-money’s day, there was no
decentralized way to maintain the accounts.

Nevertheless, other attempts at cryptocurrencies followed, but each died when
the dot-com bubble burst around the turn of the century.

Nearly a decade of silence followed. And then, in 2008, bitcoin emerged,
becoming the world’s first decentralized digital currency.

Bitcoin’s inventor is known as “Satoshi Nakamoto,” but his real name remains a
mystery. However, Nakamoto did make his intentions clear. He wanted to make the
concept of a traditional bank – that is, of a central financial institution –
obsolete. This is why Bitcoin doesn’t operate on any central registry and why
all transactions are made directly between the users.

Now that you know how cryptocurrencies were born, let’s look at how they work.

## A blockchain is a powerful, secure and decentralized database that can track and manage transactions.

If you’ve read about bitcoin, you might have seen the word “blockchain” and
wondered, what the heck is that?

The simplest way to understand a blockchain is to think of it as a secure and
shared database that contains transactions.

Blockchains can be used for many purposes, but Bitcoin has become the most well
known. For the purpose of this digital currency, the blockchain is used to hold
transactional information about how many bitcoins are being transferred between
two accounts. So the data would read something like, “Account A transfers 10
bitcoins to account B.”

The database is called a blockchain because the data is stored in sections
known as *blocks*, and these blocks are organized in a precise way that
basically creates a chain of data.

The first block of data is called the *genesis block*, and each block that
follows contains information about the preceding block, thereby linking them
together like a chain. However, a more appropriate analogy might be a series of
Russian nesting dolls, with each block containing the information from previous
blocks *inside *it.

The real defining feature of a blockchain database is that it’s decentralized.

This is an important feature for a number of reasons, the most important being
that it prevents trickery. Generally speaking, most digital things can be
easily duplicated – just consider how easy it is to email someone a JPEG or an
MP3. But a digital currency, in order to have real value, needs to be protected
against duplication.

Blockchain technology overcomes this challenge by decentralizing the database.
So if you have five bitcoins, this data isn’t being stored on one central
computer; it’s constantly being synchronized over a whole network of computers.
If you tried to go in and quickly change your bitcoin amount from five to
fifteen, this change would show up on everyone’s copy of the blockchain and
anyone can disagree and prevent it from becoming official.

The other level of security provided by blockchain is its use of cryptography,
which is why the term “cryptocurrency” is used to describe bitcoin and other
blockchain-based digital currencies.

Cryptography allows for secure communication and secure storage of information
and provides added levels of authentication within the blockchain. Every
transaction requires a digital signature that uses cryptography to authenticate
transactions and ensure that past transactions aren’t tampered with.

*“Blockchains will be to finance what the Internet was to music and video.”*

## Blockchains operate through a process of consensus, which takes a lot of energy and time.

To get a better understanding of how cryptocurrencies work without the aid of a
central banking authority, we need to look at the step-by-step process of a
transaction.

Blockchains operate through a consensus protocol known as *proof-of-work*. This
protocol ensures that the blockchain always accurately represents every
transaction made.

This works by having all the individual computers in the network, called
*nodes*, agree on one “true” version of the blockchain. The nodes that actively
participate in the consensus-building process are called *miners* or
*validators*.

Obviously, it can be a challenge for all the nodes to agree on everything, from
the order in which the transactions should be processed to what the next block
should look like. And it’s not uncommon for nodes to contend with different,
and sometimes conflicting, proposals on what the next block should be.

However, aside from the different proposals, there is always a “longest chain”
or “heaviest chain.” This is the one chain that is ultimately approved and
considered “true” by the consensus protocol. It’s referred to as the “world
state.”

All of this work and building of the blockchain takes a lot of energy. In fact,
maintaining the bitcoin blockchain for one year consumes as much energy as the
entire country of Ireland uses in that same time period.

Therefore, to help them cover their electricity costs, miners and validators
are allowed to give themselves 12 bitcoins for every block they add.

As you might imagine, the decentralized nature of blockchain makes the process
a bit slow compared to conventional databases. In a conventional database like
*MySQL* or *VoltDB*, a new entry takes a few milliseconds. However, for the
Ethereum blockchain, which represents today’s most advanced blockchain, a new
entry takes an average of three minutes.

Nonetheless, that means blockchains are a thousand times faster than
transactions made on the stock market, which take around three days to
finalize. And compared to credit card payments, which take around four months,
a blockchain transaction is about 100,000 times faster.

## Thanks to their ability to perform automated functions, blockchains can also be applied to contracts.

Blockchains aren’t just a database for digital currency, though. They can also
be used to create a binding contract between two or more parties.

In the world of contracts, any number of things can cause one or more of the
parties to fail to fulfill their contractual obligations. And this can result
in endless and exhausting periods of litigation.

Blockchains may obviate many contractual issues, however, since they can manage
*smart contracts*.

A smart contract not only stores the details of an agreement; it can execute
the terms of the agreement as well.

Smart contracts are essentially a legal text written as a computer program and
inscribed into a blockchain. And since blockchains never forget anything, a
smart contract is certain to execute on time.

So a blockchain smart contract can be used to trigger a payment at a certain
time, whether the payment is made in cryptocurrency or with a traditional
credit card. Or it could guarantee that digital goods, such as a music or video
file, are transferred to a party’s email account.

Through the use of smart contracts, blockchains make it possible for
*decentralized autonomous organizations *(DAOs) to operate. Bitcoin and
Ethereum are just two examples of this kind of organization.

A DAO is essentially a company built out of computer code and managed by
blockchain. It functions through a series of smart contracts that interact with
each other in order to perform certain functions.

You could think of a DAO as a car that not only drives itself but also
regularly tunes itself up and takes care of itself. Some smart contracts
function as the engine and keep it running, while others pay for gas or charge
the battery. And though the car represents its own organization, it could also
be part of an Uber-like network.

However, while things can run smoothly in a DAO, there can come a time when a
problem arises and, with it, a question: Who should be held responsible?

## Blockchains have some problems that are still being resolved.

One thing should be clear by now: blockchains are not a fad. It’s already been
proven that blockchain has the potential to revolutionize commerce and finance.
But there are some issues that need to be worked out.

One of the most important problems is that blockchains can lose data. This
isn’t a common or likely problem, but it is something that’s already happened
to the Bitcoin blockchain.

This happens when two or more of the large groups in the computer network – the
ones responsible for storing the information – are unable to agree on the
correct state of the blockchain. When this occurs, the network *forks*, or
*splits*.

So you could ask two nodes about your Bitcoin account, and if each node is on a
different side of the split network, you could get two different account
statements. Obviously, this would be a nightmare for every financial
institution using the blockchain.

A split can also occur if the connection between the nodes is cut. This would
cause the formation of isolated groups within the network. But such a split
would be resolved as soon as the connection is reestablished.

The network will always accept the group with the highest computing power as
the “true” state of the blockchain. This is because the “longest” chain
requires the most power and is considered the most up-to-date. Unfortunately,
this would mean that all transactions made on the smaller, rejected chain would
be lost.

Another issue with blockchains is that it’s impossible to be completely
anonymous or confidential.

Every transaction requires a *sender address* and a *receiver address*. These
addresses are also called *pseudonyms*, and are only a long string of letters
and numbers – things like “17fHXHDB8.” But the details of every transaction can
be seen by everyone. So if someone’s paying close attention, it’s quite
possible for the patterns and details of your transactions to reveal your true
identity.

This lack of confidentiality, especially as it pertains to extremely sensitive
data such as medical information, might prevent blockchain becoming widely
popular. But there’s also hope that the issue could soon be resolved.

## Ethereum offers an alternative to the Bitcoin blockchain and currency.

Unless you’re really familiar with blockchain or digital currencies, chances
are you haven’t heard of Ethereum. But let’s have a look at this recent
development in blockchain.

Bitcoin may be the first blockchain, but it’s also limited. It’s focused
exclusively on money, whereas Ethereum is a general-purpose blockchain, which
makes it much more versatile. In addition to cryptocurrencies, Ethereum enables
you to build such things as land-title registries and the kind of rating
systems used on eBay and Amazon.

Ethereum was invented in 2013 by Vitalik Buterin, who wanted to avoid the
problem that highly specialized blockchains were experiencing when being
employed for other uses. So, even at the time of its conception, Ethereum was
meant to do many things well, and this is the reason it’s the most advanced
blockchain to date.

Like other DAOs, Ethereum isn’t owned by anyone. It’s also free and highly
accessible, thanks to an intuitive programming language called *Solidity*.

Ethereum does come with its own digital currency – or its own bitcoin, so to
speak – called *ether*. This is the currency you’d use on the Ethereum
blockchain to pay for transactions, running calculations or storing data.

While Bitcoin may be the king of the cryptocurrency world today, ether, thanks
to its more adaptable blockchain, could become the preferred digital-payment
method of the future.

*“Ethereum is the blockchain of blockchains.”*

## Ethereum offers many possible applications, but there are still concerns.

Now that we’ve taken a broad look at Ethereum, let’s put some of the specifics
under the microscope.

There are a number of ideas and potential applications of the Ethereum
blockchain that make it quite exciting. For example, the Ethereum blockchain
could make voting virtually tamperproof.

Every voter could use their signature to make an entry in the blockchain that
would represent their vote. In this system, no one could change it since the
proof-of-work process would forbid it. Plus, the process of vote counting would
be completely transparent.

Another possibility for Ethereum is in the management of land titles,
especially in developing countries where the confusion over land ownership has
held back the economy. The Ethereum blockchain would again make this process
fully transparent and straightforward.

And then there’s banking. It comes as no surprise that most major banking
corporations have been funding research of blockchain technology. The financial
market, along with trading in stocks and other assets, could benefit greatly
from the transparent and programmable nature of blockchains.

But this is just the tip of the iceberg. Ethereum could also improve escrow
payments, social networking, ridesharing, employment services, crowdfunding
platforms and much more.

However, since Ethereum is open-source software and without warranties, there
is concern about how trustworthy it really is.

This is an important issue for big corporations, since they’ll never agree to
use something that isn’t fully reliable and bug-free. In this respect,
Ethereum’s developers have yet to make real efforts to make it ready for
corporate use.

Finally, there’s the issue of the imposition of government regulations in the
future.

Blockchains can be used for criminal activities, like money laundering or black
market sales, which could result in some governments imposing heavy regulations
or even outlawing blockchain technology.

But the fact remains that blockchains have the potential to change our world
just as profoundly as the internet did. And as it stands now, Ethereum could be
*the *blockchain of the future, since it is by far the most advanced we’ve seen
to date.

## Suggested further reading: Blockchain Revolution byDon and Alex Tapscott

*Blockchain Revolution* (2016) sheds light on a new technology that may soon
change the way we bank and do business. Blockchain is the technology behind the
Bitcoin – but it could be so much more. If we utilize it fully, we could do
away with costly middlemen and create a transparent financial system free from
the endless corruption and dark money that plagues the world.