![The Big Nine](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5ca323b26cee070007a59346/1_1/470.jpg)

# The Big Nine

*Amy Webb*

# Final summary

The key message in these blinks: **Artificial intelligence has made remarkable
progress in recent years and is set to make even more tremendous progress in
the near future. Unfortunately, the nine major American and Chinese tech
companies leading the field are being driven in troubling directions by market
and governmental pressures. Unless that changes in the next couple of decades,
the result could be a disaster for humanity. To avert that disaster, the United
States and its allies must take decisive action as soon as possible.**

The Big Nine (2019) provides a sobering look at the past, present and future of
artificial intelligence, both as a field and a form of technology. After
recounting some of the most recent and startling developments, the author goes
on to identify the key factors and individuals currently shaping it, the
directions in which it appears to be heading and the troubling impacts it could
have on the future of humanity. She also suggests some intriguing ways in which
those impacts could be avoided.

# What’s in it for me? Learn about the disturbing directions in which artificial intelligence is currently headed – and how humanity can change course before it’s too late.

If you’ve watched any science fiction movies or TV shows from the past few
decades, then you’ve probably seen some dark visions of the future. In many of
those visions, the downfall of humanity is brought about by the advancement of
artificial intelligence or AI.

Broadly defined, AI refers to any computer program or system that can perform
tasks that resemble acts of human intelligence. Some specific, present-day
examples include recognizing objects, understanding speech and implementing
strategies to accomplish goals, such as beating a person at a board game. AI
can also refer to the field of research and development in which those programs
and systems are created.

In these blinks, you’ll learn about AI in both senses of the term. After a look
at AI’s current level of advancement and some of the most cutting-edge
examples, you’ll meet the key players – the “big nine” corporations of the tech
industry. Who are they? What do they want? Why do they want it? And where are
they taking AI as a result?

In these blinks, you’ll receive answers to those questions. Along the way,
you’ll also find out about
- the ways in which AI has already achieved superhuman intelligence;
- the competing visions of the world currently shaping the field of AI; and
- the likelihood of some version of those dark sci-fi scenarios coming to pass.

# AI has been revolutionized by the development of deep neural networks.

Since the turn of the twenty-first century, AI has made remarkable progress.
The key to this progress has been the development of **deep neural networks**
or DNNs.

The precise mechanics of how these work are rather complicated, but the basic
idea behind them is fairly simple. Somewhat similar to the human brain, a DNN
consists of thousands of simulated neurons linked together and arranged into
hundreds of complex layers. By sending and receiving signals to and from each
other, these layers of neurons are able to do something called **deep
learning**. That means they can teach themselves how to do things with little
or no human supervision; they don’t have to be taught by their human creators,
like computer programs of yore.

By harnessing the deep-learning power of DNNs, AI was able to defeat one of its
longest-standing adversaries: the ancient Chinese board game of Go. Played with
white and black stones on an open grid, this strategy game is even more complex
than chess, despite its simple appearance. For instance, whereas chess has only
20 possible opening moves, Go has 361. And by just the second round of play,
the possibilities balloon all the way up to 128,960!

Because of the game’s complexity, an AI Go program needs to be able to engage
in very creative, responsive and on-the-fly strategic thinking to win a game
against a skilled human opponent. For decades, such a victory was one of the
primary benchmarks against which the power of AI was measured. And from the
1970s all the way through the early 2000s, AI failed to meet the mark, losing
even to novices and children. The game was just too complex for it.

But then along came a start-up called DeepMind that specialized in deep
learning and was acquired by Google in 2014. In that same year, the team from
DeepMind deployed a DNN-powered program called AlphaGo against a professional
Go player, Fan Hui. It beat him five games to zero. It then went on to play in
tournaments, where it trounced every human opponent it encountered – including
the reigning world champion!

The benchmark of winning at Go had finally been reached, and the incredible
deep-learning powers of DNNs had been dramatically demonstrated. But as you’ll
find out in the next blink, AlphaGo was just a taste of things to come.

# AI is already beginning to achieve superhuman intelligence.

As remarkable as it was at the time, the success of AlphaGo in 2014 has already
been eclipsed by its successor, AlphaGo Zero, which debuted in 2017. To
understand the key difference between the two programs, you need to understand
a bit more about the DNNs that power them.

While a DNN is able to teach itself how to do something like playing Go without
specific instructions from humans, it still needs learning material with which
to work. For the original AlphaGo, that meant an initial data set of 100,000
previously played games of Go. By sifting through this library, AlphaGo was
able to develop a sense of judgment about how to play.

In contrast, AlphaGo Zero started from scratch with no library of previously
played games. Instead, the program just started playing Go against itself,
without even knowing the rules for placing the pieces. By seeing what worked
and didn’t work in each game, it was able to develop its own sense of judgment,
which soon surpassed that of its predecessor. Just 40 days after its electronic
birth, AlphaGo Zero was able to beat the latest version of the original AlphaGo
in 90 percent of its games!

But here’s what’s even more astounding: in those mere 40 days, AlphaGo Zero not
only figured out all of the strategies that human Go masters had painstakingly
learned over thousands of years. It also discovered brand new strategies that
had never before been witnessed. Freed from AI’s previous reliance on a
human-generated data set, AlphaGo Zero was able to surpass the limits of human
knowledge and think in novel, non-human ways about the game.

In a certain sense, AlphaGo Zero can, therefore, be said to have achieved
superhuman intelligence; it developed a type of thinking that was both
different and better than ours. How much better? Well, a Go player’s skill
level can be measured by a number called an **Elo rating**, which measures the
player’s probability of winning based on past performance. World champions tend
to have ratings around 3,500. AlphaGo Zero left that number in the dust, with a
rating of more than 5,000!

Now that might sound impressive, but unless you’re a professional Go player,
you’re probably not too worried about it. Well, that might change by the end of
the next blink.

# The range and power of AI will increase exponentially over the course of the next 50 years.

Beating world champions at Go might be an impressive feat, but it’s also a
pretty limited one. After all, those same champions don’t just know how to play
Go; they can also tie their shoes, write love letters, formulate political
opinions and do innumerable other things that humans can do. In contrast, a
program like AlphaGo Zero does one thing very, very well – but only one thing:
in this case, playing Go.

Given the narrowness of the domain in which it’s intelligent, such a program is
called **artificial narrow intelligence**, or ANI. Applications of ANI already
surround us in modern society; they include spam filters, voice transcribers,
self-driving cars and virtual assistants like Apple’s Siri and Amazon’s Alexa,
both of which are powered by DNNs.

Tech companies are pumping out ANI systems and programs as fast as they can,
applying them to more and more domains of human life. They’re already at work
in our cellphones, hospitals, genetic research labs, loan application
processors and even the stereo interfaces of many new cars. As this trend
continues, they’ll eventually be intertwined with nearly every aspect of our
daily lives.

In each of their many domains, ANI systems approach, equal or even surpass
human intelligence – but only within their domains. However, the same basic
principles behind DNN-powered ANI programs can also be used to create more
generalized systems that can tackle a wider scope of tasks, such as conducting
medical research or actively participating in organizational meetings with a
human-like voice. When this milestone is achieved, ANI will be surpassed by
**artificial general intelligence** or AGI. At this point, AI will begin to
approach parity with humans in terms of overall intelligence.

From there, the sky will be the limit. Like present-day ANI programs, AGI
systems will be able to improve themselves continuously at a breathtaking pace.
This will eventually allow them to outperform the human mind – not just by a
little, but by trillions of times its level of intelligence. At that point, AI
will have achieved **artificial super intelligence** or ASI.

The author estimates that AGI will be developed sometime in the 2040s, while
ASI will arrive by 2070. For reasons we’ll take a look at in the next blink,
we, therefore, have a very small window of time in which to shape humanity’s
AI-filled future.

# There’s a brief window in which the future of AI will be shaped, primarily by actors in the United States and China.

As it evolves, AI will eventually develop a mind of its own: an ability to
think about the world in a way that’s both independent of human input and
distinctly non-human in the way it functions. We can’t predict exactly what
that mind will evolve into, but we do know what it will evolve from: the AI
systems being built right now.

That means we’re living in a pivotal period of history. From now until some
time in the next two decades, our current AI research and development will
shape the contours of the landscape on which the future of humanity will be
built.

By the 2040s, the author estimates, AGI systems will already be in place. As
they begin evolving into ASI, they will reach a point of no return – developing
outside of our control, too powerful for us to stop or change. And as you’ll
find out later, the results could be devastating for our species. The time to
act is therefore now – and if we don’t steer carefully, we might end up driving
off a cliff.

So who’s at the wheel? A group of corporate giants and a pair of governments
that are becoming rival superpowers.

Those corporations are the “big nine” tech companies, along with their various
partners, investors and subsidiaries. Six of the corporations are based in the
United States: Google, Microsoft, Amazon, Facebook, IBM and Apple. Three of
them are based in China: Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent. The governments in
question are those of these two countries, along with their respective allies.

For the sake of simplicity, we’ll speak of these AI-steering corporations and
governments in terms of their being either American or Chinese, although they
often operate in or hail from other allied countries. The idea here is that
they belong to one of two international camps dominated by the United States
and China.

As you’ve probably heard umpteen times before, the United States is the world’s
only remaining superpower from the twentieth century, while China is the
emerging superpower of the twenty-first century. The two countries are
economically intertwined in many ways, with considerable trade and investment
money flowing between them, but they’re also political rivals. While the United
States is trying to maintain its domination over the world, China is trying to
assert its own.

In vying for power, these two countries are also pushing very different visions
of how society should be run. In the next blink, we’ll take a look at what
these visions are and how they’re guiding AI research and development.

# The US approach to tech research and development revolves around consumerism, profit-making and short-term thinking.

In an ideal world, AI would be harnessed toward lofty, humanistic goals – goals
that have humanity’s best interests in mind, like curing cancer or alleviating
poverty. Unfortunately, those are not the primary goals of current AI research
and development, neither in the United States nor China.

Let’s start with the United States. Here, the government subscribes to an
ideology of free-market capitalism. This entails a relatively hands-off,
do-nothing approach to guiding the nation’s economy. To be sure, there’s some
regulation and oversight, but there’s an absence of grand-scale, government-led
economic planning, policy-making and nurturing of industries. Essentially, the
market is left to its own devices.

As a result, US tech companies and their investors pursue their own projects
with their own money, for their own objectives. And within a free-market
capitalist system, their main objective is simply increasing their profits.

To make money and keep their investors happy in the fiercely competitive and
rapidly evolving tech industry, companies need to develop new, marketable goods
as quickly as possible. Otherwise, their competitors will outflank them, and
their customers and investors will send their money elsewhere.

As a result, US tech companies are pressured into taking a reckless,
short-sighted approach to innovation. Locked into a frantic race to beat their
competitors, they lack the time and incentives to fully vet their products and
services before releasing them to the world. Crucial questions are left
unanswered – questions like, could this product or service have a negative
impact on society? And could it violate ethical standards?

The tech industry’s attitude toward these questions tends to be “build it first
and ask for forgiveness later.” In other words, rush the product or service to
the market and wait for the public to find out the consequences. If they turn
out to be negative, well, just issue an apology and move on. The result has
been a number of headline-grabbing stories in the news over the past few years,
such as the Facebook–Cambridge Analytica scandal of 2018, in which millions of
Facebook users’ personal data were compromised.

With AI, the stakes are even higher, as we’ll see a little later. But first, we
need to take a look at the Chinese tech industry to round out our picture of
the political and economic landscape in which AI is developing.

# China has a government-led tech industry that prioritizes AI and is aimed toward control and global domination.

China’s guiding ideology and its resulting tech-industry landscape contrast
sharply to those of the United States. Instead of free-market capitalism, the
Chinese government champions a hybrid form of socialism and capitalism. This
features a relatively protected market presided over by a strong, centralized
and authoritarian state.

As a result, China’s tech industry is largely shielded from foreign
competition. That’s especially true of the industry’s “big three ”companies,
each of which can be likened to an American counterpart: roughly speaking,
Baidu is like Google, Alibaba is like Amazon and Tencent is like Facebook. Both
Google and Facebook are banned from operating in China, and Amazon has been
heavily impeded from gaining a foothold there.

Meanwhile, China’s tech industry enjoys strong support and guidance from the
Chinese government. For instance, the government provides Chinese universities
with enormous amounts of funding for tech research. It also practices the sort
of grand-scale economic planning, policy-making and tech-industry nurturing
that the US government eschews.

AI provides a case in point. The Chinese government has explicitly formulated a
goal of becoming “the world’s primary AI innovation center” by 2030. And it’s
already backing those words with action. For example, it’s currently building a
two-billion-dollar AI research park outside of Beijing, and it’s piloted
compulsory AI courses at 40 high schools as of 2018.

Meanwhile, the Chinese government is working closely with China’s tech industry
to accomplish its own objectives, which are two-fold.

The first is to control its population. One chilling example of this is its
development of a social credit score. This works a lot like your financial
credit score – only it’s designed to rank citizens’ overall trustworthiness,
not just their creditworthiness. Points are deducted from people’s scores for
infractions like violating traffic signals. These scores then determine
decisions as prosaic as whether an individual needs to pay a deposit to rent a
bike. This might sound like science fiction, but a pilot version of the system
has already been tested in the city of Rongcheng, in Shandong province.

The Chinese government’s second objective is to use its economic clout to
topple the United States as the world’s dominant superpower. Since AI will be
one of the predominant technologies of the future, China will receive a
significant economic boost from its rapidly developing AI sector. The author
estimates that it could expand China’s already burgeoning economy by 28 percent
by 2035.

The stage is being set for an increasingly fierce global competition between
the United States, China and their respective allies – a competition in which
AI will determine who emerges the victor.

# The current course of AI development could lead humanity to a tremendous disaster.

What could happen if AI research and development were left to continue on more
or less its present course?

The following answers are speculative, but one of their main premises is a
pretty safe bet: in the not-too-distant future, sophisticated AI-powered apps,
systems and devices will be intertwined with nearly every facet of human life,
from stocking our refrigerators to finding our next date.

Meanwhile, whole spheres of society could become increasingly reliant upon AI:
transportation, banking, healthcare – the list goes on and on. In healthcare,
for instance, wearable AI devices could tell us when we have a deficiency of a
particular nutrient – and then recommend menus to fix it! In the more distant
future, this could be taken one step further: microscopic AI robots called
nanobots could be injected directly into our bodies where they’d be able to not
only detect but also heal our maladies without any need for human intervention.

Unfortunately, the more we become intertwined with or even dependent on AI, the
more we’re setting ourselves up for trouble. Let’s say the current rush to
churn out innovative tech products and services as quickly as possible
continues in the United States. Well, that rush could lead to devices that are
prone to glitches – and those glitches could disrupt our lives. Whole systems
of transportation and healthcare could go down, and you could even get locked
out of your own refrigerator!

But there’s a still more menacing threat than glitches: militarized hacking.
Imagine, as the author does, that the Chinese military could figure out a way
to hack all of the United States’ AI apps, systems and devices. It could then
effectively hold the entire nation hostage. That might sound like a tall task,
but it would become a possibility if all those AI carriers were linked together
by just a couple of operating systems.

And if China were really out to destroy the United States and its allies, it
could even hack the nanobots that everyone got injected into their bodies and
turn them against their hosts, thereby annihilating entire populations. That
might sound like an unimaginably monstrous act, but, if our current
environmental crisis worsens and we start running out of resources on earth, it
could become simply a matter of survival.

That’s pretty dark – but a brighter future is possible, as we’ll see in the
next and final blink.

# To safeguard the future of AI, the United States and its allies need to develop the right policies and international cooperation.

AI could provide us with tremendous benefits, but it could also lead us into
many dangers. How do we ensure we can reap the former while avoiding the
latter?

In the United States, the answer is clear: the country’s major tech companies
need to reorient their AI research and development around humanistic values,
prioritizing the pursuit of humanity’s best interests over corporate profit.
For example, before releasing any new AI system to the market, companies should
safely and thoroughly test them – not just to see if they work, but also to see
if they would have any unintended negative consequences on society. In the near
future, one way to do this could be to use existing AI to conduct simulations
of the societal impact of new AI.

But under present circumstances, that’s all wishful thinking. Even if companies
sincerely wanted to do it, they’d still be pressured by relentless market
forces into developing and releasing unvetted AI products as quickly as
possible. Unless those forces can be mitigated, it would be unrealistic to
expect companies to exercise self-restraint.

That’s where the government needs to step in by creating and implementing a
robust, comprehensive national policy toward AI. That doesn’t just mean
developing new laws, regulations and agencies to ensure that tech companies are
complying with legal and ethical standards. It also means pumping enormous
amounts of funding into the AI industry. This steady infusion of cash would
remove the pressure to rush products onto the market and rake in profits as
quickly as possible.

But to succeed at reshaping the future of AI, the United States can’t go it
alone. It also needs to enlist the help of its allies. To that end, the United
States, the EU and other allied countries like Japan and Canada should form a
Global Alliance of Intelligence Augmentation or GAIA. Guided by humanistic
values, this new international body would bring together a broad array of
leaders and experts: not just politicians and AI researchers, but also
economists, sociologists, political scientists and futurists.

Working together with the help of GAIA, the US-allied governments and companies
would be able to share knowledge and build on each other’s advancements. The
resulting progress and prosperity would make rival powers like China want to
join GAIA so that it wouldn’t be left behind. But in order to join GAIA, these
powers would have to agree to adhere to GAIA’s guiding values.

The stage would thus be set for humanity to enjoy the enormous benefits of AI
without falling prey to its risks.

## What to read next: The Four by Scott Galloway

You’re now familiar with the “big nine” companies shaping the technological
terrain of humanity’s future – but even within this select group of corporate
superpowers, there are four companies that are especially dominant: Amazon,
Apple, Facebook and Google.

Dubbing them “the four,” Scott Galloway provides a closer look at these
world-changing titans of the tech industry. How have they impacted society?
What are the secrets to their success? And how should people navigate the world
left in the wake of their giant footsteps? To find out the answers to these
questions, check out the blinks to **The Four**.

Source: [The Big Nine by Amy Webb](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/the-big-nine-en)