![Antifragile](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/528a271f37326300080b0000/3_4/470.jpg)

# Antifragile

## Final Summary

The main message in this book is:

**Antifragility is a quality which has propelled human progress from the
earliest times. It allows systems to grow and improve in an unpredictable and
volatile world. However, modern society is in the process of trying to
dismantle the volatile environment that is vital for antifragility. In doing
so, we are making ourselves more fragile.**

This book in blinks answered the following questions:

**What is antifragility?**

- Unlike fragile items, which break when put under stress, antifragile items
  actually benefit from volatility and shock.
- The antifragility of a system depends on the fragility of its constituent
  parts.
- Shocks and stressors strengthen antifragile systems by forcing them to build
  up extra capacity.
- Tranquil environments result in fragile systems – antifragility stems from
  volatility.

**How do you take advantage of antifragility?**

- To take advantage of antifragility don’t try and understand the opportunities
  you see, just know when to seize them.
- To become antifragile, manage your risks so you can benefit from
  unpredictable events.
- The larger the organisation or system is, the harder it will be hit by
  unexpected crises.

**How does modern society damage antifragility?**

- Many modern professions are antifragile, but at everybody else’s expense.
- Our desire to eliminate volatility from life will eventually make our society
  more fragile.
- Modern teaching suffers from a “turkey problem” – we misread the past when
  predicting the future.
- We undervalue the role of antifragility in fuelling progress and advances in
  society.

## Shareable content

**3-5 great quotes from the book**

- “What doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.”
- “You can’t predict in general, but you can predict that those who rely on
  predictions are taking more risks, will have more trouble, perhaps even go
  bust.”
- “People we call ignorant might not be ignorant.”
- “Society is being fragilized by spineless politicians, draft dodgers afraid
  of polls, and journalists building narratives.”

## Actionable ideas from this book in blinks

**Don’t try to predict the future, just make sure you’re prepared for it.**

You can’t hope to accurately predict what will happen in the future. Shocks and
surprises, whether they are good or bad, will sneak up on you.

Instead of planning for what you think might happen, ensure you are prepared
for anything. First, minimize your risks; ensure that, even if the worst
happens, your assets are secure. It is only then, when you know you can survive
anything, that you can begin to take the (smaller) risks that allow you to
succeed.

**Don’t get squeezed. Instead, maximise your options.**

Squeezes are bad; options are good. You should therefore try to avoid the
former while welcoming the latter.

You want to avoid getting into situations where you are forced to do something
whatever the cost. It is much better to secure a position where you have the
option, but not the requirement, to do something. So next time you’re
negotiating your rent for a new apartment, ask to have the option to stay as
long as you want, rather than the obligation to. Then you can stay as long as
it’s cheap, but move when the rent gets too expensive.

**It’s often best not to listen to experts**

Next time you hear some advice from a financial expert about where to put your
money, it might be best to just ignore it. After all, this expert could be
wrong, and it’s your money he’s playing with – there’s no risk for him. He can
go on making predictions whatever the result.

If you want to know what an expert really thinks will happen, find out where he
puts his own assets. Then you’ll know where his trust lies.

## Unlike fragile items, which break when put under stress, antifragile items actually benefit from volatility and shock.

When you send an item made of glass by post, you would probably ensure that the
package is clearly labelled ‘Please Handle with Care’ because the glass is
**fragile;** it needs to be put in a tranquil environment because it shatters
when harmed by stresses and shocks.

Fragility is a relatively easy concept to understand; we are all aware that
fragile items need to be protected from volatile situations. Yet when we try to
think of the opposite of fragility, we struggle. What do you call something
that benefits from volatility?

You may be thinking that **robust **is the answer. However, although a robust
item will be able to survive shocks better than a fragile one, it is not the
opposite; it doesn’t benefit from harm. What we are looking for is something
that you would deliberately mishandle, something that you’d package with the
label ‘Please Handle Roughly.’

We struggle to define this concept partly because none of the world’s major
languages has a word for it. We must therefore use the word **antifragile **to
describe the antithesis of fragility – things that benefit from shock and
therefore prefer volatility to tranquillity.

A good example of antifragility is the story of the Hydra from Greek mythology.
The Hydra was a many-headed serpent which tormented the ancient world. Each
time one of these heads was cut off in battle, two would grow back in its
place. So every time the beast was harmed, it benefitted; the Hydra was
therefore antifragile.

**Unlike fragile items, which break when put under stress, antifragile items
actually benefit from volatility and shock.**

## The antifragility of a system depends on the fragility of its constituent parts.

A good example of antifragility is the evolutionary process; it thrives in a
volatile environment. With each shock, evolution forces life forms to
transform, mutate and improve to become better suited to their environment.

Yet when you look closely at the evolutionary process, something very
interesting becomes clear. While the process itself is undoubtedly antifragile,
each individual organism itself is fragile. For evolution to occur, all that
matters is that the successful genetic code is passed on. The individuals
themselves are unimportant and die in the process. In fact, the system needs
this to happen to free up living space for more successful individuals to
thrive.

The evolutionary process demonstrates a key trait of antifragility. In order
for the system as a whole to be antifragile, most of its constituent parts must
be fragile. This is because the success or failure of these parts acts as
pieces of information, informing the system of what works and what doesn’t.

Think of it as **trial and error. **The mistakes and successes of each
individual part provide the information as to what succeeds and what doesn’t.
The price of failure in evolution is extinction; therefore, every failure
actually improves the overall quality of all life that has evolved.

Another example of antifragility can be seen in the economy. Its constituent
parts, from one-person artisan workshops to huge corporations, are somewhat
fragile but the economy itself is antifragile. For the economy to grow, it
needs some of these parts to fail. The failure of a start-up in the coffee
making business, for example, will make that industry stronger overall, as
other coffee manufacturers learn from their mistakes.

**The antifragility of a system depends on the fragility of its constituent
parts.**

## Shocks and stressors strengthen antifragile systems by forcing them to build up extra capacity.

We often experience antifragility without even knowing it. Exercising is a good
example of this. When we exercise we put our bodies through unusual stress. In
doing this, our bodies react to the shock and grow stronger. In this way our
bodies are antifragile.

The example of exercising also highlights how the concept of antifragility
works. When confronted by **stressors,** in this case weights or a treadmill,
an antifragile system will respond by **overcompensating**: it will improve its
capacity to deal with possible future shocks. This is a crucial element of
antifragility; strength comes from overcompensating against adversity.

Often the overcompensation will leave antifragile systems with elements of
excess strength. These are areas of redundant resources built up in response to
stressors and shocks. Common sense tells us that success depends on the most
efficient use of resources, so these **layers of redundancy** seem terribly
inefficient.

Yet, overcompensation and the redundancy it brings are vital to antifragility.
In our bodies, for example, overcompensation and redundancy allow us to be
prepared for unknown problems ahead; what can seem to be a waste can suddenly
become a lifesaver in an emergency. A small amount of exercise drives our
bodies to build up extra capacity in preparation for a bigger shock in the
future.

It may seem wasteful to take resources from other areas of the body to build up
muscles you might never use. But one day when you confront an unexpected
stressor - say having to carry a piano up five flights of stairs - you will be
glad you built up the extra muscle, even if it was useless until then.

**Shocks and stressors strengthen antifragile systems by forcing them to build
up extra capacity.**

## Tranquil environments result in fragile systems – antifragility stems from volatility.

Antifragility is typically found in natural, or biological, systems. Most
man-made items cannot be antifragile as they cannot self-improve based on
failures or unexpected stressors. At best, they can only be robust. A washing
machine, for example, will eventually wear down after repeated use; it may be
able to stand a fair amount of shocks, but it cannot benefit from them.

There are, however, a few artificial systems that are also antifragile. The
economy is a good example. Although it is a man-made system, it is incredibly
antifragile. Such systems are almost biological in nature, due to their
complexity: they consist of a series of interdependent layers and sub-units.

While complexity is crucial to all antifragile systems, artificial or natural,
it is not enough to sustain them. What these antifragile systems demand is
volatility. As we have seen, antifragile systems depend on the fragility of
their sub-units – some of which must die to strengthen the system as a whole.
Shocks and stressors determine which sub units are to survive and which are
not. In a tranquil world, without shocks and stressors, there would be no
pressure on a system’s constituent parts. It would, therefore, eventually lose
its antifragility.

Once again, the economy provides us with a good example of how tranquility can
be disastrous. Many governments have attempted to tame the economy, using
regulations and subsidies to smooth out the economic cycle. This was done with
the belief that the economy could be managed and made more predictable and
tranquil. But in removing volatility from the system, they removed the vital
stressors and shocks. Without the information that these provide, resources
became misallocated and the economy became susceptible to huge, damaging
shocks. Tranquility leads to fragility.

**Tranquil environments result in fragile systems – antifragility stems from
volatility.**

## To take advantage of antifragility you don’t need to understand the opportunities you see, just when to seize them.

When the author was working in highly volatile global currency markets, he was
surprised to find that often the most successful traders were also the most
uneducated. They didn’t understand complicated economic theory or the finances
of the countries whose currencies they were trading. They just knew when to buy
and when to sell.

In general, society places far too much value on theoretical, or academic,
knowledge and not nearly enough on practical knowledge. We assume that the
former inevitably leads to the latter, though, in fact, the two are completely
separate. Knowing why planes fly does not make you a qualified pilot.

You can take advantage of a volatile and therefore antifragile system without
properly understanding its principles when you have **options**: the
opportunity, but not the obligation, to do something. For example, stock
options give you the chance to buy a certain stock at a certain time for a
fixed price X. If the price of the stock rises above price X, you would
exercise your option because you would effectively be getting a discount, but
if the price stays below X, you would not. The underlying stock market is very
volatile, but this way you need not understand the complex phenomena that drive
its fluctuations. To profit, you just need to know whether or not to use your
option when the time comes.

But options exist outside the stock market, too. For example, a friend asks you
to “come to a party, if you have the chance.” That’s an option. There’s no need
to forecast your plans or mood for that evening; you just need to decide
whether or not to go when the time comes.

**To take advantage of antifragility you don’t need to understand the
opportunities you see, just when to seize them.**

## To become antifragile, manage your risks so you can benefit from unpredictable events.

You cannot go through life without encountering periods of volatility and
uncertainty; unexpected events such as economic collapses or natural disasters
can happen in the blink of an eye.

In order to make yourself antifragile, you have to accept this and try to
“domesticate” the uncertainty, rather than avoid or eliminate it. The best way
to achieve this is to follow a **barbell strategy: **much as a barbell has
weights on both ends but nothing in the middle, you must prepare for extremes,
both negative and positive, and ignore the middle path.

The first thing you must do is concentrate on the negative element on your
barbell: minimize your exposure to potentially disastrous risks. For example,
if you ensure that 90% of your assets are secure against unexpected market
collapses, you know that you are safe against such shocks. This money might not
be making a huge profit, but at least it’s safe.

Once this has been achieved, you can concentrate on the other end of your
barbell. With the other 10% of your assets you can take small risks in highly
volatile and unpredictable areas that you can profit from. The upsides could be
huge, but the downside would only be 10%. This way you stand to make huge gains
if things go well, while having limited exposure to negative consequences.

Compare this to someone who puts 100% of their assets in an area of medium
risk. No matter how much money they potentially could make, in the case of a
downturn they stand to lose everything.

**To become antifragile, manage your risks so you can benefit from
unpredictable events.**

## The larger the organisation or system is, the harder it will be hit by unexpected crises.

Imagine you have to attend an important conference in Iceland. Naturally, you
book your flight well in advance to get it at the cheapest price.
Unfortunately, a day before the conference, the airline informs you that your
flight is cancelled. You can’t miss the conference, so you have no choice but
to book a much pricier, last-minute flight.

This kind of nightmare is known as a **squeeze**: a situation where you have no
choice but to do something, regardless of the cost. Squeezes are the opposite
of options.

The cost of a squeeze is determined by the size of the entity being squeezed;
the larger something is, the harder the squeeze. In the ticket example, if it
was just you flying, you might be able to secure another ticket at a somewhat
higher cost, but imagine if an entire university delegation was in that mess?
There probably wouldn’t be enough replacement economy seats available, so they
would need to buy pricier first-class tickets, or even charter a private jet.
The size of the troop would make the squeeze worse.

Similarly, globalisation has transformed the world economy into a single
behemoth, making it ever more vulnerable to large squeezes. Everyone, from
banks to your local supermarket, is globally interconnected, whether by trading
stocks in Japan or buying produce from Brazil. If a squeeze like a stock market
crisis occurred, this interconnected string of dominoes would cascade: banks
would be squeezed to cut funding to businesses, which would be squeezed to lay
off employees, who would be squeezed to perhaps lose their homes.

Any economic squeeze today would be global and universal, as would the
suffering it causes.

**The larger the organisation or system is, the harder it will be hit by
unexpected crises.**

## Many modern professions are antifragile, but at everybody else’s expense.

In the months preceding the 2008 financial crisis, a great many financial
experts in the world’s business schools and newspapers confidently informed us
that there was no need to worry about the economy. The “experts” were of course
very wrong: the global economy did collapse and many people lost their
investments, homes and pensions.

Now, you’d think that because of their failure to predict one of the biggest
financial collapses of all time, these experts would find themselves in hot
water. In fact, a vast majority of them kept their influential positions
without even having to apologize for their mistakes. This is because the field
they work in is relatively narrow, and all the experts were familiar with each
other and interdependent, which meant they weren’t too eager to criticize each
other. Soon their mistakes were largely forgotten.

This exemplifies a deep problem at the heart of modern society. Many people’s
antifragility comes at other people’s expense; they reap the full benefits when
they are right, but suffer none of the consequences when they are wrong. The
problem is that they can, therefore, continue spouting their bad advice and the
costs fall onto others, as with the financial crisis. As it’s not their own
money they’re playing with, they lack **skin in the game, **meaning they have
nothing to lose.

Similarly, bankers today also benefit from not having skin in the game. In
medieval Catalonia, it was common practice to behead failed bankers; this
provided them with adequate motivation to work for the common good. Compare
this to modern bankers who are constantly playing with other people’s money
without risk to themselves. When they do well, they collect huge bonuses, yet
when they fail, it’s not their own money, or head, that is lost. They have
become antifragile at the expense of everybody else.

**Many modern professions are antifragile, but at everybody else’s expense.**

## Our desire to eliminate volatility from life will eventually make our society more fragile.

Many politicians and economists have viewed the economic cycle of boom and bust
as inefficient and unpredictable. In an attempt to make the process better,
they developed complex theories about when and how they should intervene in the
cycle to smooth it out.

This is a crucial problem with modern thinking: it tries to make society as
smooth and tranquil as possible. As human knowledge grows, we become more
arrogant about what we can and should control. We view volatility as something
we can’t predict, so we try to control it.

We call the policy where we try and meddle with systems to make them smoother
**naïve interventionism. **Unfortunately, we don’t know as much as we think we
do, so instead of making systems better, we make them worse. Without knowing
it, we rob systems - such as the economy - of the volatility vital for
antifragility.

Removing volatility, and therefore antifragility, from a system has one
particularly explosive effect: without volatility, problems are not as
apparent, so they lie dormant, growing more severe until they reach massive
proportions. To highlight this phenomenon, consider the example of a forest:

A forest will always be at risk of fire. Yet, the danger of a large,
devastating fire is often decreased by a series of smaller fires, which purge
the forest of its most flammable materials while leaving most of the trees
intact. Volatility, like the small fires, helps prevent the larger event. By
preventing uncertainty in our systems, we are building up the flammable
material for a firestorm.

**Our desire to eliminate volatility from life will eventually make our society
more fragile.**

## Modern teaching suffers from a “turkey problem” – we misread the past to predict the future.

Imagine you were a turkey on a brisk October day, happily clucking away. If you
were to predict the future from looking at the recent past, you would have
little reason to worry. Every day your owner has fed you well and made sure you
are healthy; you may, therefore, confidently predict that your owner loves
turkeys and that the future for you looks rosy. On Thanksgiving Day you would
be in for a shock.

This reflects one of the main problems of modern times: making predictions
about the future based on a narrow view of the past. Universities, business
schools and newspapers are full of people telling us what will happen in the
future. Companies spend millions hiring strategists and risk managers, hoping
to take advantage of the predictions.

Yet these predictions are products of the “turkey problem,”predicting the
future based on a false narrative of the past**.** Those who follow the
predictions could be in danger of suffering the consequences when the predicted
events don’t happen**.**

Another flaw in our thinking is that we assume the worst event we have
witnessed must be the worst that could ever happen. This leads to contingency
plans and fail-safes based on this worst-case scenario. It doesn’t occur to
many people that a bigger event could happen in the future; an event that
they’d be wholly unaware of.

The Fukushima nuclear reactor, for example, was built to withstand the biggest
earthquake ever experienced. Its designers were obviously unaware that an even
bigger earthquake could strike in the future. When this happened in 2011, the
reactor was completely destroyed.

**Modern teaching suffers from a “turkey problem” – we misread the past to
predict the future.**

## We undervalue the role of antifragility in fuelling progress and advances in society.

We are taught in school that the Industrial Revolution was a product of
scientific progress: developments in theoretical knowledge drove technological
advances which, in turn, transformed manufacturing, business and society.

Yet, this narrative is wrong. The Industrial Revolution was, in fact, largely
instigated not by academics and professionals theorizing, but by hobbyists and
amateurs tinkering. The submarine, for example, wasn’t invented by a university
or a naval institution, but by a religious minister, Rev. George Garrett, who
worked on it in his spare time. Inventions like these were the result of
hundreds of amateurs working independently, constantly trying out new
technologies and ideas, often failing but occasionally hitting success, from
which society as a whole benefitted. They therefore formed an antifragile
system.

The false narrative of the Industrial Revolution is an example of how modern
society doesn’t understand the importance of antifragility. We can’t imagine
our progress was determined by chance in a complex system of trial and error.
Therefore, when we look back at history we try to create narratives that give
more deterministic reasons to our advances. We really want to think that
inventors and engineers in the past knew what they were doing and were not
merely tinkering around in the dark, hoping to land on something that works.

This has implications for modern society. Many modern professionals in the
sciences owe their high regard and funding to their claims that they’ll make
ground-breaking discoveries. Money is poured into these professions in the hope
that they will produce new theories, which, in turn, will facilitate new
advances and discoveries. Yet, theoretical knowledge cannot bring about the
progress it claims; we need randomness, and the antifragility it creates, to
bring about real change.

**We undervalue the role of antifragility in fuelling progress and advances in
society.**

