![Radical Acceptance](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5aa7cc0cb238e100071c837b/3_4/470.jpg)

# Radical Acceptance

## Final summary

The key message in these blinks:

**Only by accepting ourselves for who we are, and acknowledging our most
painful experiences, can we begin to truly love ourselves. Once we establish
self-acceptance, we can begin to heal the parts of ourselves that are hurting
and find greater inner peace**

Actionable advice:

**Don’t keep busy to mask feelings of inadequacy.**

Many of us spend our lives in a rush, but staying busy is often nothing more
than a way of distancing ourselves from pain. 

For example, when you hear someone talk about the recent loss of a loved one,
they often remark that they’re “managing to keep busy.” 

If you’re suffering from emotional pain, you might worry that, if you stop
being busy, you’ll be plunged into despair.

Nonetheless, it’s healthier to accept this pain than occupy yourself with
mindless small talk or meaningless tasks.

## What’s in it for me? Use Buddhist thought to become a better person.

Who isn’t dissatisfied with at least one part of their life? Maybe you wish you
had a better body or a better work ethic. Perhaps you dislike your inability to
resist temptation or your propensity to lash out at others.

Often we dwell on these supposed faults of ours; we beat ourselves up because
we aren’t perfect. But it doesn’t have to be like this. In these blinks, we’ll
learn about techniques derived from the Buddhist concept of radical acceptance.

By applying radical acceptance to your own life, you’ll judge yourself less
harshly. As a result, you’ll become a happier, calmer and more well-rounded
individual.

In these blinks, you’ll also discover
- why the story of Adam and Eve may not serve us so well;
- how to stop yourself losing your temper with a naughty child; and
- why you should never run away from your feelings.

## We live in a trance of inadequacy, and Western culture is to blame.

Have you ever had a dream where you’re desperately trying to do something –
climb a hill or outrun a pursuer – but, despite your exertions, you can’t move?
You’re working as hard as you can and going absolutely nowhere.

Such dreams are thought to signify that, deep down, the dreamer feels
inadequate, as if she’s doomed to fail forever.

It’s no surprise that we feel this way. In fact, we often move through our
daily lives in the same preoccupied fashion as we do in these dreams – as
flailing protagonists, fixated on a narrow goal that always seems to elude us.
Just consider how many of us go through life totally fixated on our efforts to
“go somewhere” or achieve something.

Even when engaged in enjoyable activities, like talking with our friends, or
reading bedtime stories with our children, we’re often simultaneously replaying
our concerns and our plans for the future. Instead of occupying the moment,
we’re thinking about where we need to “go” next. But, just like the top of
those unclimbable hills in dreamland, the “future” is a phantom location. It
will never arrive, and our chase will ultimately have been in vain.

Why do we incessantly worry about where we’re going? Well, thanks to Western
culture, many of us feel inadequate – that what we’re doing now isn’t good
enough.

Think of Western culture’s central myth – that of Adam and Eve and their
banishment from Eden. This story, and its message of original sin, teaches us
that people are fundamentally flawed and that they must constantly strive to
redeem themselves if they want to regain entry to paradise.

Small wonder, then, that we feel like we’re falling short. From our youngest
years, we’re taught that who and where we are isn’t enough.

Luckily for us, this isn’t the only worldview on offer. There’s also Buddhism,
which teaches that human beings are naturally loving, wise and compassionate –
not flawed or sinful.

The Buddhist worldview is that you’re probably doing just fine as you are. In
the next few blinks, we’ll learn about the Buddhist message and how we can
apply it to our daily lives.

## Self-judgment keeps us trapped, but radical acceptance can set us free.

Do you ever feel stuck in a rut? If so, you might have something in common with
a white tiger named Mohini.

Mohini lived in the National Zoo, in Washington, DC, in the 1970s. After being
kept in a small cage for many years, Mohini was transferred to an enclosure
with acres of space, trees and even a pond. Her owners at the zoo were sure
she'd love her spacious new home.

But they were mistaken. 

> Mohini lived the rest of her life in just one corner of her new enclosure, pacing an area the size of her old cage until the grass wore away beneath her paws.

In other words, despite the “freedom” on offer, her mind kept her trapped in
old patterns of behavior.

Just like Mohini, many of us remain stuck in our habits, even though greater
freedom is possible. But what exactly keeps **us** encaged? Instead of iron and
concrete, it’s self-judgment and feelings of inadequacy.

For instance, we often listen to our inner critic, which tells us that,
whatever we do, we’ll never be good enough. This negativity keeps us trapped in
lives that are small and narrow, just like Mohini’s cage. It’s this negative
voice that stops us from doing all the things we long to do, such as loving
others without holding back.

Luckily, unlike poor Mohini, we **can** free ourselves.

The key to unlocking the cage is to accept everything about our inner and outer
selves. In order to do this, we must be aware of what’s occurring in our bodies
and minds at any given second, without attempting to judge, control or resist
the thoughts or feelings or sensations that we find there.

Fostering this awareness and considering all your thoughts, feelings and
sensations with an open and kind heart means you’ll be practicing something
called **radical acceptance**.

You’ve surely had unwelcome thoughts. For instance, maybe, against your will,
you’ve disliked another person. Now, you may have judged yourself for feeling
this way, and felt guilty for having nasty thoughts that you can’t control.
However, with an outlook of radical acceptance, there’s no need for any
self-criticism. You can simply acknowledge your thoughts, and move on.

Radical acceptance silences that negative inner voice, enabling self-acceptance
and allowing for a life of greater freedom.

## Instead of trying to manage uncontrollable situations, take a pause.

Dealing with pain is hard. Maybe you had to witness a loved one fighting with a
terminal illness. Or maybe you were laid off at work. Whatever the case, even
though we know deep down that we can’t control these painful situations, we
often try to manage them.

For instance, if someone insults you, you might lash out at them or vow to cut
them out of your life altogether. This might seem like an appropriate reaction,
but responding like this is likely to make you feel worse, not better.

Why? Because trying to change or escape particular experiences means we’re
rejecting them. This is problematic because our personal experiences are an
important part of what makes us who we are. By rejecting an experience, even
emotionally painful ones, we reject part of ourselves, and tell ourselves that
we’re not good enough and we must change.

But the more we try to change these uncontrollable situations, the more we feed
our feelings of inadequacy.

Fortunately, there is a better approach. When faced with troubling situations
that we can’t control, the best way forward is to take a minute to pause. By
pausing, the chance to recognize your emotional, inner experience opens up.

For instance, you may feel out of control when faced with your favorite food.
So the next time you’re staring at that illicit chocolate bar and feeling as
though scoffing it down is beyond your control, take a brief pause. Recognize
your feelings in that moment. Perhaps they’re a mixture of excitement, guilt
and self-criticism.

By pausing for just a minute or so, you can break down your thoughts and
clearly see what desires and fears are motivating you. Once you recognize these
emotions for what they are, you’ll have a much better chance of creating new
ways to respond to them.

After that pause, and regardless of whether you decide to savor the chocolate
bar or go for a jog instead, you’ll be sure to make a more conscious choice.

## Be a kind and constant friend to yourself and your painful experiences.

When in a distressing situation, we tend to panic. If this sounds familiar, you
can learn something from Jacob, one of the author’s colleagues.

Jacob was an experienced meditation teacher, who was also in the early stages
of Alzheimer's disease. Standing in front of a class of meditation students, he
found himself suddenly confused and unsure of where he was. Importantly,
though, Jacob didn’t panic. Instead, he told his students how he was feeling.
He admitted to being scared, confused and disoriented.

Not the best meditation class, right? On the contrary!

Although it might sound disastrous for both the teacher and his class, the
students thanked him afterward for one of the best lessons on meditation they’d
ever received.

Why were his meditation students so impressed? Because instead of pushing away
his negative experience – his fear and confusion – Jacob had the courage to
express what he was experiencing.

Importantly, by naming his fear and confusion, Jacob honored his painful
experience, instead of rejecting it as something that was “wrong” or
unmentionable. He didn’t turn the experience into an enemy; he accepted and
made friends with it. Jacob’s reaction was a shining example of radical
acceptance.

When you recognize your emotions at any given moment and greet them with this
unconditional friendliness, you’re practicing radical acceptance. In this
state, you pay careful attention to your feelings, allowing yourself to accept
them instead of making them into an enemy to recoil from.

This aspect of radical acceptance is crucial because it helps increase
self-compassion.

Most of us are only friendly toward ourselves when we’re succeeding. As soon as
we fail at something, we rush to self-judge and reject the parts of ourselves
that are less than perfect. But ask yourself: Would you treat a good friend
poorly if they failed at something? Hopefully not.

It can be difficult, but try to extend to yourself the same compassion and
understanding you’d extend to your closest friend.

## Rather than being out of touch with your body, you should focus on your physical sensations.

When someone lets you down, it’s easy to lose your temper. When the author
discovered that her son had failed yet again to do his homework, her first
impulse was to angrily confront him. But then she opted for a different
approach.

Before storming into her son’s room, she stopped and focused on the physical
sensations her body was experiencing.

Amazingly, she felt herself calming down. Instead of concentrating on her
furious thoughts and rushing toward a confrontation with her son, she focused
her attention on how the anger was making her body feel. As soon as she became
aware of her own body, she felt tenderness replace her anger.

She realized her anger was making her whole body tighten and her chest felt as
if it was about to explode.

By becoming more attuned to how she was feeling, she became more attuned to how
her son was feeling. This empathy helped her find the right things to say when
she later had a conversation with him.

Remembering the connection between body and mind will help you make better
decisions. Unfortunately, most of us remain out of touch with our bodies to the
extent that we inhabit an entirely mental world.

We don’t pay enough attention to our physical sensations from moment to moment
because we’re always planning what we’ll do next. For example, even when you
hug a close friend, have you ever calculated how long you should embrace until
you pull away?

This is too bad, since fully experiencing physical sensations, both positive
and negative, can offer a sense of being alive and connected with every part of
life. Even feeling the rain on your face can awaken your senses if you let
yourself focus on the experience for long enough.

## Self-judgment may protect you from suffering, but suffering can help you discover your deepest self.

Sometimes it's hard to love ourselves. Daniel was a meditation student who
considered himself the world’s most critical person, and most of his criticism
was directed inward. He constantly criticized himself for everything that went
wrong in his life, from his divorce to his back pain.

He couldn’t even meditate without intrusive thoughts that he was doing it all
wrong.

Does this harsh self-criticism sound familiar? Unfortunately, many of us are
just as hard on ourselves as Daniel.

The reason we behave like this is to protect ourselves from suffering.

How does this defense mechanism work? Well, instead of allowing ourselves to
suffer feelings of vulnerability, jealousy or fear, we cover up these painful
emotions with unnecessary self-judgment. We push them away, fearing that our
vulnerability or jealousy might lead to other “bad” feelings, such as neediness
or self-indulgence, for example.

Unfortunately, rejecting suffering in this way doesn’t help. In fact, it’s only
through learning to fully experience suffering, instead of pushing it away and
judging it, that we can begin to heal the parts of ourselves that are hurting.
Furthermore, it’s only by accepting and having compassion for our own suffering
that we can discover our innermost nature.

Buddhism offers a positive approach to suffering. In fact, an important
Buddhist teaching says that suffering is a gateway to compassion and by being
compassionate we’re expressing the deepest parts of ourselves.

You, too, can cultivate tender compassion by learning to accept your suffering.

Once Daniel acknowledged the full extent of his emotional and physical pain –
instead of smothering it with criticism – he started to heal. In the end, he
was able to alleviate his pain through self-compassion.

## **Suggested** **further** **reading: ******When Things Fall Apart ******by Pema Chödrön**

**When Things Fall Apart** (1997) is a guide to dealing with the biggest
challenges life throws at you. These blinks explore a range of concepts and
strategies, from meditation to self-compassion to breathing techniques, that’ll
help you develop resilience in the face of adversity and a deeper appreciation
for living in the moment.
