first step is always the same: getting yourself comfortable
- start off easy, with a five to ten minute meditation
- It will be difficult at first to sit quietly and peacefully. DON'T GIVE UP
- Simply pay attention to your breath

1 minute meditation is good enough to start
- Easy 1-min meditation: count ten breaths

Try 2 Hour Meditation
- lie on your back
- focus on breath
- clear away worries and stress

R.A.I.N
- Recognize: become familiar with the emotion that just popped up
- Accept: don't deny the emotion. Accept it
- Investigate: What is the origin?
- Non-Identification: remember your identity is not determined by your emotion

And remember: there is no right or wrong in meditation. Just relax, and enjoy


# Meditation for Fidgety Skeptics by *Dan Harris, Jeff Warren and Carlye Adler*

>Meditation for Fidgety Skeptics (2017) is a down-to-earth beginner’s guide to
>meditation – especially for those skeptics among us who think that meditation
>is a lot of new age hooey. Dan Harris presents readers with a firsthand
>account of how even people with restless minds and no time to spare can start
>experiencing the scientifically proven benefits of meditation.

![Meditation for Fidgety Skeptics](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5ade2852b238e10007596e7e/1_1/470.jpg)

# What’s in it for me? Learn from a skeptic that there are some very real benefits to meditation.

Over the past decade or so, meditation has ceased being a practice strictly for
monks and hippies. Today, it’s an almost mainstream activity. More and more
doctors and psychiatrists are recommending it for their patients, and even
movie stars, singers and celebrities have started recommending their favorite
meditation apps.

But maybe you’re still skeptical, or maybe you think you’re too much of an
impatient worrier for meditation to work for you. Well, that’s pretty much what
author Dan Harris thought, too. He felt certain that he was too fidgety for
meditation, but now he’s here to tell you that such excuses are total nonsense.

With a little time and practice, anyone can appreciate the benefits of
meditation. And the benefits extend far beyond just easing your stress levels;
they include helping your immune system as well as your ability to focus on
day-to-day work. The truth is, meditation is easy to get into. All it takes is
stopping every once in a while to take ten deep breaths, and you’ll be on your
way toward forming a lifelong habit of self-improvement.

In these blinks, you’ll discover
- how an on-air meltdown can be an important wake-up call;
- which US congressman is spreading the joy of mindfulness; and
- the difference between the RAIN and STOP meditations.

# Everyday life can be stressful, and the scientifically proven remedy is meditation.

There are still a lot of fast-paced, city-dwelling professionals who think that
meditation is a lot of new age nonsense. The author, Dan Harris, understands
this feeling rather well since, not long ago, he was one of those people. If
someone had told him in his twenties that one day he’d be promoting the
benefits of meditation, he’d have laughed so hard that beer would have shot out
his nose.

But life is full of unexpected twists and turns, some of which can be brought
on by times of extreme stress.

For Harris, a big change came in 2004, when he was working as an anchorman for
ABC News. While live on air, with an audience of five million viewers, the
author suddenly began to stutter and slur his words – he was in the grip of a
panic attack.

Like most panic attacks, however, this incident wasn’t an isolated event. In
Harris’s case, it was the result of years spent reporting from war zones, the
horrors of which had led him to sink into a state of depression. Yet, being the
busy man he was, he’d failed to recognize or appreciate the symptoms he’d been
experiencing.

These included trouble getting out of bed in the morning and a feverish feeling
that never fully went away. After a brief attempt at self-medicating with
cocaine and ecstasy, the on-air meltdown was Harris’s personal rock bottom.

But this turned out to be a good thing. It was the wake-up call Harris needed
to make some much-needed changes in his life. And it’s what led to him
discovering the benefits of meditation.

Like a lot of people, Harris was what you’d call a “fidgety skeptic” about
meditation. But after doing some research, he was surprised to find a wealth of
solid, scientific evidence showing the practice to be a proven stress reducer.
It’s benefits included lowering blood pressure and helping people recover from
anxiety, depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

Harris also found legitimate data indicating that meditation both strengthens
the immune system and rewires the neurons in the brain to improve attributes
like self-awareness, endurance and compassion.

# Meditation is about finding inner peace by focusing on a sensation that works for you.

No matter what kind of meditation you’re doing, the **first step is always the
same: getting yourself comfortable**.

    first step is always the same: getting yourself comfortable

So take a moment to get yourself situated in your favorite chair and take a few
deep breaths as you straighten out your spine and your posture.

It’s good to **start off easy, with a five to ten minute meditation**.
Remember, this practice is about finding peace of mind – so the most important
thing to have, especially when you’re starting out, is a positive, easy-going
attitude.  That means leaving behind any competitive feelings or preconceived
notions of right or wrong.

    start off easy, with a five to ten minute meditation

**As a beginner, you might find it difficult to sit quietly and peacefully**.
You might get annoyed by some noisy neighbors or easily distracted by negative
thoughts. **If this happens, don’t give up**. Remember, there’s no right or
wrong experience, and if you’re fidgety, as Harris was at first, it doesn’t
mean meditation isn’t for you. So forget your expectations of what meditation
is supposed to be and just try to stay calm and open.

    It will be difficult at first to sit quietly and peacefully. DON'T GIVE UP

The next thing to understand is that meditation is about focusing your
attention on a single sensation.

The most common and traditional sensation is the act of breathing. So, without
changing anything about your normal rate of breathing, just gently focus your
attention on your in-breath and out-breath. Focus on how the air enters through
your nose, moves to your lungs and how your chest or stomach expands and
contracts. Or make your focus more general, and **simply pay attention to the
rhythm of your breathing**.

    Simply pay attention to your breath

While you’re in this zone, try to enjoy the experience and think of each breath
as something to be savored, the same way you might enjoy each bite of a tasty
meal or each sip of a delicious beverage.

To maintain focus, you can also count or “take note” of each breath, by
silently saying “in” for each inhalation, and “out” for each exhalation.

But it doesn’t have to be breathing. You can focus on whatever sensation works
for you, whether it’s the sound of a ticking clock or the sight of a candle’s
flame, the feeling of your body against your chair or your feet against the
floor.

Whatever you choose to focus on, keep it up for five to ten minutes.

# Get started with short meditations, which can easily lead to longer ones.

One of the most common concerns Dan Harris hears about meditation is the amount
of time it requires. Many people are under the impression that there’s just no
way they’ll be able to find time to meditate in their hectically busy schedule.

But contrary to what you may think, forming a daily meditation practice doesn’t
have to require more than a couple minutes here and there. In fact, just **60
seconds can be enough to get your practice started**.

    1 minute meditation is good enough to start

One of the most difficult things about meditation is **making it a daily
habit**, which is extremely important if you want to experience the full
benefits. So, if all you have is one minute today, then use that minute and be
proud you accomplished it.

If you really think about it, you should be able to find moments in your day
where you can allow yourself a meditation minute. How about the moment after
you brush your teeth? Or after your first cup of coffee? A lot of people find
that their commute on the train or bus is the perfect time to close their eyes
and meditate for a minute or more.

Here’s a helpful guide to make the most of a one-minute meditation – it’s
called the **ten breaths meditation**, and it’s super easy. Wherever you happen
to be, just silently count along as you take ten long, deep breaths in… and
out…

    Easy 1-min meditation: count ten breaths

This exercise will instantly help shift your attention away from whatever
worries or preoccupations you may be experiencing at the moment.

Most people find that these short meditations are gateways to finding the time
for the longer ones.

While it might seem impossible to fit in a ten-minute meditation at first, once
you get going you might find yourself *wanting *to make room in your schedule
for longer sessions. One minute today might turn into five minutes tomorrow,
and, a couple of weeks later, who knows – you might be enjoying ten minutes of
peace in the morning and the evening.

If this happens, it’s a great sign, since it means you’re moving from
*extrinsic *motivation, which is you thinking, “I *have *to meditate,” to
*intrinsic *motivation, or thinking to yourself, “I love meditating!”

Naturally, being intrinsically motivated means you’ll be more likely to make
this a regular part of your life.

# It’s been an uphill battle to get mainstream acceptance, but meditation has a lot going for it.

Have you avoided meditating because you were worried about what your friends
might think? This is another common concern the author has encountered. But
here’s the truth: meditation has become far more popular than you may know.

It’s been a long, uphill fight to turn meditation into a mainstream practice in
the United States, but, in recent years, attitudes have finally begun changing.

For example, the conservative worlds of business and politics have long held
out against meditation. But, even here, things are shifting.

On Washington’s Capitol Hill, Congressman Tim Ryan has written a book called *A
Mindful Nation*, which promotes the benefits of meditation. Ryan praises the
practice, saying that it’s not only good for individuals, but also,
potentially, for the nation – that it could lead to better governmental
policies on a range of issues, including education, health insurance and
military training.

Ryan sees mindfulness and meditation as something both schoolchildren and
soldiers could benefit from. And Ryan has walked his talk, too. He started a
meditation group near Capitol Hill and convinced a public school in his home
state of Ohio to be among the first to conduct mindfulness exercises in the
classroom.

While Ryan did encounter some resistance, he’s collected a wealth of comebacks
and statistics to counter just about any argument.

To the parents who worry that meditation involves some kind of spiritual or
religious element, Ryan points out that mindfulness is not forbidden by any
religion, nor is it inherently spiritual to begin with. He also shows parents
the compelling scientific evidence of how beneficial it can be for the
development of healthy brains.

Ryan also cites the long list of diverse, high-functioning, successful people
who practice meditation, from tennis champion Novak Djokovic to Steve Jobs. If
someone expresses doubts, it’s likely there’s a public figure they respect
who’s practicing meditation, and this makes it much harder for them to maintain
their skepticism.

So, with any lingering doubts put to rest, let’s explore some more advanced
practices.

    “I think in the future, mental exercise will be considered as important and mainstream as physical exercise.”

# Meditation is a great way to let yourself be lazy and connect with a companion.

Try 2 Hour Meditation
- lie on your back
- focus on breath
- clear away worries and stress

If someone recommended a **two-hour meditation**, your first thought might be to
politely say, thanks, but no thanks. But, as the saying goes, “don’t knock it
until you’ve tried it” – because this could very well be your new favorite
exercise.

Basically, a two-hour meditation is your free pass to live a life of leisure
for a while.

Unlike a typical meditation, this one works by lying on your back – either on
the floor, in a bed or on the couch. If you want, you could even have the TV on
or music playing; there are basically no rules.

To begin with, close your eyes, take some deep breaths and enjoy the sensation
of your body gradually relaxing. Now, imagine yourself sinking into the floor,
couch or bed, and feel yourself letting go of *everything*. You can slowly lift
your arms and let them flop back down beside you to encourage this sense of
letting go.

Continue clearing away any worries or stress for the next two hours. If you
happen to fall asleep, don’t worry. That’s not against the rules. And if your
mind wanders, don’t panic. Just bring it gently back to your sensation and
continue to let go.

This meditation can also be done with a companion, be it a pet, a close friend
or a partner.

Lying on your backs, snuggle up next to your companion and use your proximity
to this other body as a way to heighten your focus on your own sensations.
During your meditation, you can even focus on that connection to your partner’s
body, or on the slight movements caused by your companion’s breathing.

This is also a great meditation for cultivating a deeper sense of compassion
and love toward your companion, as well as toward yourself.

As with any meditation, you shouldn’t be forcing any feelings. Just be open and
welcoming to them, and if you do feel compassion and love during the session,
gently register what this feels like by making a mental note.

While this meditation normally lasts two hours, it can be as long or short as
you’d like it to be. What’s important is that you’re being kind to yourself and
creating a space where it’s okay to let go of the anxious world around you.

# Meditation provides you with the tools to deal with your emotions.

When you feel unwanted emotions, do you run away from them, bottle them up or
try to pretend they don’t exist?

Well, part of what makes meditation so valuable is that it gives you the tools
to stop running and face your messy emotions.

If you know someone who’s into massage therapy, you may have heard the saying,
“our issues are in our tissues.” This refers to all the tight knots and sore
muscles we can end up carrying due to our stresses and anxieties. But it also
means that, by relaxing our clenched jaw or tight shoulders, we can release the
emotions that tightened them up in the first place.

The real trick to getting the most out of your meditation is to **avoid running
away or trying to control the newly freed emotions you encounter during your
session**. Instead, you want to act like a curious observer, identifying the
feelings and tracking them back to their origins.

To do this, try employing the **R.A.I.N. method, which stands for Recognize,
Accept, Investigate and Non-identification**.

    R.A.I.N

So, let’s say you’re meditating and a strong emotion pops up. The first step is
to **truly recognize it and become familiar with its sensations**. Does it cause
your chest to feel heavy? Does it make your throat tighten up? Pay attention to
every detail so that you’ll be able to recognize it quickly next time.

    Recognize: become familiar with the emotion that just popped up

The **second step is to accept that you have this emotion**. If it’s anger or
jealousy, don’t deny it just because you’d rather not have it. Accept it and
allow yourself to have and feel the emotion. This will actually help it pass
quicker.

    Accept: don't deny the emotion. Accept it

**Now comes the investigation, where you try to deduce the origins of this
feeling**. Is the guilt because you forgot to call your mom on her birthday?
Maybe the resentment is due to someone getting the contract you were after?
Understanding the causes of your emotions will allow you to master them,
instead of being totally at their mercy.

    Investigate: What is the origin?

Finally, there’s **non-identification, which is about learning that your identity
is not determined by whether or not you feel certain “good” or “bad” emotions**.
Everyone has unwanted emotions; they are just storm clouds that will eventually
pass to reveal the blue sky again.

    Non-Identification: remember your identity is not determined by your emotion

This is difficult at first, but, with daily meditation, it will get easier. Of
course, there may come a time when you need help, which is when a professional
therapist can be invaluable.

# If you have a high-pressure job, the S.U.R.F. meditation tool can improve your performance.

Lots of people have stressful jobs, but, for some of us, a bad day can be a
matter of life or death. For doctors, police officers and firefighters, a
standard workday has far more pressure than meeting a deadline or delivering a
presentation.

One of the best ways to cope with high-pressure jobs is to meditate, which is
why Sylvia Moir, the chief of police in El Cerrito, California, has introduced
a regular meditation practice for the officers in her team.

Moir’s decision was based on a number of studies that show how both performance
and quality of life are improved when people with dangerous jobs start
meditating. This holds true for police as well as military soldiers and
firefighters. Statistics reveal that meditation improves short-term memory,
helps speed up the recovery from traumatic events and reduces the body’s
production of the stress hormone *cortisol*.

While some of the police officers in El Cerrito were initially hesitant, they
soon embraced meditation as the benefits became apparent. Officers were
recovering faster from difficult incidents and bringing home less stress and
tension, making for a calmer family life.

One of the specific techniques used by those with dangerous jobs is called the
**S.U.R.F. meditation, which stands for Stop, Understand, Relax and Freedom.**

This form of mediation is essentially a quick pause, taken whenever you’re in a
particularly stressful situation, and it’s intended to keep you from making a
mistake or reacting in a way that you’ll surely regret.

So first you *stop*, and take a moment to pause and think before you react to
the situation. If you’re dealing with a client or coworker who’s antagonizing
you, stop and breathe for a moment before you take the bait and decide to yell
at them.

The second and third steps, to *understand *and *relax*, are about recognizing
the emotion or urge that’s driving you and understanding what it wants you to
do – punching someone in the nose, for instance – and then doing the opposite
by reacting with a calm, measured response.

The final step, *freedom*, is about embracing the fact that you’re in control
and that you don’t have to automatically respond to provocations with anger or
violence. All it takes is some mindfulness and practice.

# Stay attuned to the benefits of meditation and work toward the goal of focusing on nothing.

If you start meditating today, you’ll probably think: this is great, I have a
new practice that is going to improve my life! But the challenge is keeping it
up and staying consistent, even when you catch a cold or go on vacation.
Because once you miss a day or two, it’s easy to miss another and, before you
know it, it’s slipped away completely.

This is why it’s of the utmost importance to stay focused on the benefits.

We’re a lot like those lab rats that will keep pushing a lever once they
discover that doing so delivers a reward. But if we’re distracted, we can
easily forget about those benefits, move on and start pressing another lever.

So make sure you put the appropriate value on the rewards that meditation
provides and take note of how enjoyable and calming and relaxing it is. Also,
make sure you recognize all the transformative effects it can have on your
life.

According to Bill Duane, a manager at Google, the company’s employees have
reduced their stress levels by 19 percent thanks to meditation classes. Now,
you probably can’t produce such precise personal statistics, so you’ll have to
make an effort to recognize how meditating has reduced your stress and anxiety.
Keeping track will help you stay motivated in your practice.

The final tip is to eventually take your practice to the next level by trying
to meditate on absolutely nothing.

To do this, and not focus on your breath or a sound or anything, you’ll be
casting aside your training wheels. But you don’t have to remove them all at
once. You can ease your way into the expert level by making the sensation
you’re focusing on more and more subtle until you reach nothing.

It’s not easy to focus on nothing and do absolutely nothing at the same time,
but it’s also deeply rewarding to let go of everything.

There’s a good chance this will be frustrating at first, as your mind will
revolt and revert to unhelpful worries and distracting thoughts. But just keep
acknowledging these thoughts and letting them go.

And **remember: there is no right or wrong in meditation. Just relax, and enjoy.**

    And remember: there is no right or wrong in meditation. Just relax, and enjoy

# Final summary

The key message in this book:

**Meditation isn’t only for hippy-dippy folks who smell of patchouli oil. It’s
a scientifically proven method for improving your health and sharpening the
skills that help professionals and people working in dangerous situations. By
implementing meditation in your life, and turning it into a daily habit, you’ll
soon be on your way to a happier, less stressful existence.**

Actionable advice:

**Increase your compassion by meditating with a special someone in mind.**

Meditation isn’t just about making you more relaxed and happy. It can also make
you more compassionate. If this sounds appealing, try engaging in a short
compassion meditation. Think of someone who is currently in need of love or
support. While picturing this person in your mind, spend 30 seconds focusing on
your feelings of compassion and love for him or her. By making this a regular
exercise, it’s likely that you’ll soon find yourself being more kind and
compassionate with everyone around you.

**Got feedback?**

We’d sure love to hear what you think about our content! Just drop an email to
remember@blinkist.com with the title of this book as the subject line and share
your thoughts!

**Suggested** **further** **reading:*****Unplug *****by Suze Yalof Schwartz**

*Unplug* (2017), a useful beginner's guide to meditation, makes clear that
meditation isn’t just for hippies and monks; rather, it’s a practical exercise
that anyone can use to become calmer, happier and healthier. Get all the basic
info you need to start a daily meditation routine, as well as a number of
supplemental tools that will aid relaxation and improve your practice.

This is a Blinkist staff pick

*“These days, we are so busy at work and in our private lives that it becomes
more and more difficult to truly relax. These blinks explain why meditation is
the best medicine to fully recharge your batteries.”* – Robyn, German
Production Manager at Blinkist

Source: [Meditation for Fidgety Skeptics by Dan Harris, Jeff Warren and Carlye
Adler](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/daily/reader/meditation-for-fidgety-skeptics-en/)