# What Philosophy Can Teach You About Being a Better Leader

*by Alison Reynolds, Dominic Houlder, Jules Goddard, and David Lewis*

Source: [https://www.blinkist.com/books/what-philosophy-can-teach-you-about-being-a-better-leader-en](https://www.blinkist.com/books/what-philosophy-can-teach-you-about-being-a-better-leader-en)

![What Philosophy Can Teach You About Being a Better Leader](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/5e187bf06cee070008f4fb38/3_4/470.jpg)

(2019) explains how we've lost sight of some of the most important aspects of
leadership, and it presents helpful philosophical perspectives to get us back
on track. Drawing from both ancient and modern philosophy, the authors outline
simple yet powerful approaches to rethinking strategy, management, and
communication. And what’s even better is that these philosophical “hacks”
aren’t just for CEOs. By using these thought experiments and insights, we can
all flourish at work and outside of it. 

## What’s in it for me? Bring your A-game as a leader through simple but powerful lessons from philosophy. 

Too many people today feel disempowered at work. This is true not just for
entry-level positions but also all the way up to upper management. Psychology
has helped us figure out some of the reasons why we feel this way, but
unfortunately, many of the proposed solutions aren’t bringing results. Where
psychology has failed, maybe philosophy can succeed. 

In the following blinks, you’ll discover how philosophy can be a secret weapon
to help reframe your thinking. You’ll learn how philosophical thinking can help
you develop sustainable and constructive approaches to strategy, communication,
and decision-making. By using philosophical principles and exercises in our
personal and work lives, we can begin to thrive both as individuals and as
empowered, thoughtful leaders.  

In these blinks, you'll find out
- how Buddhist philosophy can turn your current business strategy on its head;
- why you should cancel half your meetings right now; and
- how existentialism can help you take responsibility for your choices. 

## When it comes to improving workplace satisfaction, feelings can be unreliable guides. 

When do you feel best at work? 

Chances are, you’ve probably talked to someone in HR about it. Smart workplaces
care a lot about this issue. After all, research shows that employees work
better when they feel better. The holy grail is for employees to feel
**self-actualized. **Self-actualized is a fancy term for employees feeling that
they’ve fulfilled their potential and used their talent. This is why it’s
become standard management strategy to gather personal feedback. Seems logical,
right? 

Unfortunately, such assessments are often misleading. One of the reasons they
don’t offer reliable feedback is that feelings are hard to judge accurately.
Imagine that a big financial firm is trying to figure out whether its new
open-floor plan is promoting the cooperation and community it was hoping for.
Employees are asked things like “Does using a large common space make you feel
more connected?” or “Are you happy with the change?”

While the intention is good, there are a lot of problems with basing research
on this approach. How people feel and how they report feeling are affected by
all sorts of biases. First off, our perception changes over time. For instance,
maybe you’ve always worked in a private office, and so you report hating the
common workspace the first month, only to change your opinion later.   

Your answer can also be altered by trivial factors, like being interviewed by
someone to whom you’re attracted. Finally, there’s no ideal timing for asking
such survey questions. Say you had a great conversation with a coworker in the
common space on your way to the interview. Maybe you’d felt so-so about the
space before, but because you’ve just had such a positive experience, you
report loving the new space.  

The other major problem with using these kinds of assessments for devising
strategy is that even if we could assess workers’ feelings accurately, they
alone wouldn’t tell us enough. The fact is, **feeling** self-actualized is very
different from **being** self-actualized. That’s because when we use the desire
to feel good as our only guide, we aren’t aiming for anything really
substantial. Our feelings are important, but they aren’t the **only **important
things.

As we’ll see, philosophy argues that the good life is less about feeling good
and more about pursuing things that are good **for **us.

## According to philosophy, reason and self-examination are important tools for self-actualization.

What makes life meaningful and enjoyable? For thousands of years, that’s been
one of the central questions of philosophy. 

The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle believed that the answer lies with our
ability to reason. In his view, we become self-actualized human beings by
making rational choices based on what we think is right and wrong. This is what
makes us different from animals, who live just to survive, or slaves, who have
been stripped of their freedom to make choices. 

By using reason, we’re able to find what Aristotle calls **the middle way**.
Think of it as the path of virtue that runs in between two opposing vices. For
example, the virtue of courage lies between the vice of rashness and the vice
of cowardice. If you’re too bold in the face of danger, you’re being rash. If
you’re not bold enough, you’re cowardly. But if you act with just the right
amount of boldness, you’re courageous.

Unfortunately, there’s no one-size-fits-all method to finding the middle way.
What’s courageous in one situation might not be courageous in another. Imagine
you’re under attack, whether on the battlefield or in a meeting. Should you
fight back, or should you try to diffuse the conflict? It all depends on the
circumstances, and you have to judge these yourself. And that’s why you need to
use your reasoning to figure out the right course of action.

But according to the nineteenth-century German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche,
there’s more to self-actualization than just using reason. We also have to
develop our self-awareness. Self-awareness begins with examining what really
drives our behavior and beliefs. For example, Helen might feel that she behaves
the way she does because she is a very loving and generous person. But upon
self-examination, she may discover that the real reason for her behavior is a
deep fear of rejection. 

Nietzsche argues that once we understand what drives us, we can free ourselves
and exert our **will to power. **This means taking responsibility for crafting
ourselves and our lives according to our values. In other words, before we can
fulfill our greatest potential, we first need to understand both what drives us
and what we are aiming for, beyond just feeling good today. Once we are
self-aware, we can self-actualize.

## Buddhist philosophy can help you develop a better long-term business strategy. 

How often do you hear phrases like “It’s a dog-eat-dog world,” or “If I don’t
look out for myself, no one will”? Behind these phrases is a philosophical
perspective that we’re all on one-person teams, competing with each other.

A famous business simulation exercise illustrates how deeply ingrained this
perspective is. In the experiment, participants are gathered into groups, and
each group is given a pretend fishing company to run. Members have to design
the ideal strategy for their company, and adapt that strategy as obstacles are
introduced. 

If the companies were to share information and cooperate, they would all
benefit and increase their profits in the long run. But what happens instead?
You guessed it! As the challenges become more pressing, each group fights for
dominance, assuming that if it doesn’t gain control, someone else will become
the big kid on the block and push it around.  

Most business strategy today buys into this view of human nature. As a result,
strategy focuses on trying to beat the competition and win at all costs. This
often ends up harming others – and can harm us as well. It also undermines our
long-term success. 

Luckily, this isn’t the only philosophical perspective on human nature.
Buddhist philosophy, for instance, begins with a very different premise.
According to Buddhism, all humans are interconnected, and therefore do best
when they cooperate. 

To see the benefits of putting this view of human nature into practice, just
look at the “Malbec Miracle” in Argentina. For years, wine production in the
Mendoza region of the country struggled because there was no trust or
cooperation among growers, transporters, and distributors. Everything changed
when they decided to come together with the common goal of making the local
grape varietal, Malbec, into a global brand. Their new strategy was based on
the idea that what is best for the individual is best for the group. Not only
have bribery, corruption, and mistrust plummeted, but Malbec has become the
global success they hoped for!

The Malbec Miracle is just one of many examples that show how changing your
strategy from one that prioritizes competition to one that prioritizes
cooperation is a win-win for everyone. By adopting a Buddhist perspective, we
can create fairer, more sustainable, and more successful business strategies.

## Successful strategy prioritizes experimentation and learning.   

There are right ways and wrong ways to do many things in life, like following a
recipe, putting air in your tires, or weeding your garden. But in competitive
activities like sports and business, there’s no single “right way” to play. 

That means that while we can learn from the mistakes and successes of others,
competitive activities aren’t about following set steps. Instead, we should
think about them as a playing field with some rules in place, and a bunch of
people coming up with creative ways to try to win. Think about a professional
basketball team competing in the NBA. In one scenario, its members might focus
their strategy on getting their point guard to shoot as many threes as
possible. In another scenario, the best strategy might be running out the
clock, or double-teaming a star player on the other team. There’s no single
secret to how to win. 

Instead, successful teams experiment with strategies, learn on the fly, and
adapt accordingly. In business, you can see this principle at work in the stock
market. Sure, there are some general best practices, and there are rules for
how to play, but you can’t just follow a step-by-step guide and make millions
investing. If it were as easy as that, everyone would be a millionaire!
Instead, the most successful investors are the ones who don’t assume there is
one certain path to success, but who experiment, learn, and adapt instead. 

The investor George Soros is a great example of a businessman who has become
successful by applying a philosophy of **human fallibility **to his work. The
basic idea here is that no-one is perfect and that we always have more to
learn. By understanding that anything he assumes could easily be wrong, Soros
stays alert and ready to change direction. Any time a strategy doesn’t fulfill
his expectations, he immediately examines what his initial assumptions were and
where he might have gone wrong.

It’s not easy to admit that we’ve made a mistake or that our initial strategy
wasn’t all that great. But the ability to learn from our mistakes and change
direction is often what leads to great success. Imagine that a basketball team
refused to change its strategy when its best player fouled out, or that its
assumptions about the other team’s playbook were false. Refusing to change will
just leave you in the dust. It’s the people and teams who are willing to
examine why they were wrong and what they could do better that end up taking
the day.

## Leadership isn't about influence and control. It's about trust, fairness, and leading by example. 

Imagine you’re applying for jobs, and two firms are interested in hiring you.
You meet the CEO of each of them. One CEO is late to the meeting, interrupts
you, and yells at his secretary. The second CEO listens respectfully, is honest
with you about the responsibilities of your position, and asks for your insight
into solving a problem. Which boss would you rather work for?

Chances are, you’d much prefer the second boss. That’s because the first boss
has fallen prey to a common misconception about leadership. Often, leaders feel
they need to assert their power visibly in order to come across as legitimate
leaders. But in reality, the opposite is often true. This principle goes all
the way back to Ancient Rome, where the philosopher Plutarch argued that the
best way to influence others isn’t through control, but by example. 

An excellent embodiment of this leadership philosophy is Max Perutz, one of the
most successful scientists of the twentieth century. Perutz ran the Cavendish
Laboratory, which has been awarded nine Nobel Prizes, four Orders of Merit and
nine Copley Medals. The secret to his success? Perutz built a world-class lab
by assuming that everyone he worked with was as ambitious, hardworking, and
honest as he was. He didn’t care about bureaucratic rules, hierarchies, or
proving himself to his coworkers. Instead, he inspired his colleagues to be the
best they could be through his own brilliance and dedication.

One of the reasons Perutz’s employees trusted and admired him so much was
because their work environment felt fair. There are many ways to foster a sense
of fairness. One of the most effective is to borrow a philosophical principle
called **the veil of ignorance**. The veil of ignorance was developed by John
Rawls, probably the most famous political philosopher of the twentieth
century. 

To put the exercise into practice, gather your workers together and present
them with a problem that needs solving. Here’s the catch: They must develop a
plan that feels fair to all of them, without knowing beforehand who will end up
with which role and set of duties. In other words, each participant will be
ready to do **any** of the jobs the team creates. Great leaders will involve
themselves in the process, showing their willingness to roll up their sleeves
and do any of the work that their employees normally do. 

“**Fairness should be regarded as the first virtue of a well-led organization,
and leadership as the skill of creating just such an organization.”** 

## Real authority promotes empowerment at all levels of an organization. 

It's easy to think that authority means having all the power in the room. But
real authority actually does the opposite: it works hard to make everyone feel
empowered.  

One of the biggest mistakes we make is to think about empowerment as something
to be “granted” rather than something to “gain.” When leaders treat power as a
resource to bestow in certain quantities on those below them, their workers are
not actually being empowered. That’s just “granting” something temporarily. 

To feel truly empowered, we need to be encouraged to empower ourselves. That
means asserting our ideas, taking risks, and working hard to actualize our
goals. In our private lives, we’re all empowered, to one extent or another: we
take risks, discover, and use intuition and passion as our guides. We don’t ask
permission to start a new hobby, end a relationship, or move. We take charge.
Good leadership encourages us to bring these qualities to work. 

Not only are empowered employees more productive, but they actually trust and
respect leadership more. To understand how this works, we can look at the
seventeenth-century philosopher Thomas Hobbes, who argued that authority that
is simply taken and imposed isn't real or sustainable authority. 

Hobbes thought that political rule would always be unstable unless subjects
respected the authority of their king. In other words, the people being ruled
had to give the king power, rather than the king imposing his inherent power on
them. People who feel demeaned and disrespected will resent their leaders,
while people who feel empowered will be loyal and hardworking.   

A great example of a CEO who understood this principle is Nandu Nandkishore,
who saved Nestle Philippines (NPI) from stagnant sales growth and growing
competition. Instead of coming in and telling workers what to do, he asked them
what should be done, and followed their advice. NPI turned around, and its
growth exploded. 

There are thus two important lessons about empowerment. The first is that
leaders need to stop “handing out” empowerment like it’s Halloween candy, and
instead create a work environment in which employees can self-empower. The
second is that leaders need to realize that authority isn’t simply theirs for
the taking. Just like their employees, leaders need to earn their power.

## To communicate effectively, stop trying to control the conversation. 

How often do you experience the feeling of going ‘round and ‘round in a
discussion without actually getting anywhere?

This can happen because we **think **we’re listening when, often, we really
aren’t. In reality, we have entered the conversation with a set opinion and a
predetermined outcome. Even if we claim we’re open to new ideas, a lot of the
time, we’re actually trying to control a conversation. 

As an exercise, the next time you are discussing something, try to separate the
things you can control from the things you can’t. For instance, you can control
how you say what you say and how you respond to another person, but you can't
control what he says or how he responds. 

Focusing on what is in your realm of control and letting go of what isn’t dates
all the way back to Stoic philosophy, in the third century BCE. If you think
about how complicated communication is, taking a Stoic approach makes a lot of
sense. In every conversation, participants bring their intentions, past
experiences, beliefs, and emotions to the table. All of those affect how we
respond to information, and they certainly can’t be controlled by another
person.

For example, imagine that Sarah, a manager, is trying to get Henry to take the
lead on organizing an end-of-year conference. She offers him the role in what
she thinks is clear and straightforward language. Henry responds with
hesitation, and Sarah gets frustrated and assigns the task to someone else. A
few years later, Henry ends up organizing the conference, and it’s a roaring
success. Sarah asks him why he had been so resistant to the opportunity years
before. He tells her that the way she asked him had made him feel as though she
didn’t trust his judgment, and that in prior work experiences he had been
discouraged from being creative. 

If Sarah and Henry had talked more openly about why they initially responded to
each other’s communication styles the way they did, not only would the
conference have benefited earlier from Henry’s talent, but he would have felt
encouraged and empowered. 

As leaders, we must realize that trying to control other people’s ideas and
reactions is counterproductive and, indeed, impossible. Instead, the goal
should be to take responsibility for what we **can **control – our own
thoughts, feelings, responses, and actions – and do our best to understand,
rather than try to control, other people. 

## To promote engagement, we need to learn to treat each other not as objects, but as people. 

You know that feeling of excitement and inspiration, when what you’re working
on doesn’t even feel like work anymore? Maybe you’re thinking, “Yeah, I
experience that about once every five years.” Well, feeling that way is what it
means to be engaged, and it turns out that being engaged isn’t some magic
formula – it’s actually a baseline human condition. 

Unfortunately, a lot of company culture has the whole idea of engagement
backward. Management thinks of engagement as something that needs to be
created. But if being engaged is how we naturally are, then the problem lies
elsewhere. 

One of the issues is how we measure engagement. In business, we often equate
“buy-in” culture with engagement. For example, an HR worker recently told the
authors that she used an R-A-G system to track employee engagement. R-A-G stood
for “red, amber, green,” and measured how closely a worker's opinions aligned
with management's. Basically, if you agreed with the higher-ups, then you were
engaged. 

The philosopher Martin Buber put forward a radically different approach to
interacting with other people and fostering spaces for real engagement. His
theory was based on the difference between an **I-It relationship** and an**
I-Thou relationship**. In an I-It relationship, we treat others as a means to
an end. Using a RAG system treats employees as though they are objects,
stripped of the legitimacy of their own ideas and experiences. 

Instead, we need to engage with people as the complex individuals they are.
This is an I-Thou relationship**. **To do this, Buber suggests we truly learn
to “encounter” people. Encountering someone can’t be squeezed into a
fifteen-minute planned activity. It requires the space, presence, and desire to
move beyond formal roles, open up, and learn about others.  

So where do you find the time?

Here’s an idea: What if you cut the number of meetings you have in half, and
instead proactively created more space in your schedule to “run into”
colleagues and stop for an informal, open conversation? 

The authors have coached many senior leaders through just such a process, with
stunning results. By drastically reducing formal meetings and instead creating
the space and time to “encounter” employees, brave leaders have led their
companies to new heights, all while boosting company morale and worker
engagement.

## Ethical behavior in the workplace means understanding the concept of moral plurality. 

Every day, leaders need to make dozens of decisions. One hopes that that
decision-making is guided by a sense of morality and a desire to do what is
right. If the world were cleanly divided between “right” and “wrong,” that
wouldn’t be so hard. Unfortunately, that’s not how the world works. What makes
ethical decision-making so difficult is that the real dilemma isn’t about
choosing between right and wrong, but about choosing between two competing
“rights.”

Take the following story, which occurred at the height of World War Two. An
Allied officer received word that there had been a leak of very important
information by a member of his staff. He tried his best to find out which of
his secretaries had leaked it, but to no avail. Eventually, he had to choose
between two “rights.” If he fired all of the secretaries, he would ensure there
would be no more leaks, which would protect the lives of soldiers. If he fired
no one, he would ensure no innocent secretary would be punished for the
wrongdoing of another. There wasn’t a clear right or wrong. Instead, he had to
weigh the relative value of each “right” against the other. 

There’s a philosophical term for the situation the officer found himself in.
It’s called **moral plurality**, the idea that there isn’t one single right or
wrong, but a number of competing rights. The twentieth-century philosopher
Isaiah Berlin was a big believer in moral plurality. He thought the idea of a
perfect world where all values were harmoniously combined was impossible. In
the case of the officer’s situation, for instance, there was no way for him to
uphold the ethic of protecting his soldiers’ lives while also upholding the
ethic of fair workplace conditions. 

By understanding the complexity of competing ethics, leaders can create work
environments in which people take the time to weigh both sides of an argument
before taking action. While moral dilemmas are always going to be challenging,
treating them as the need to make a choice among multiple rights versus a
choice between one right and one wrong is a big step in the right direction.

## We all want to be free, but we also need to understand the responsibility that comes with freedom. 

It’s easy to think about freedom as power. By that logic, when we’re free,
we’re free to do whatever we want. But in actuality, freedom involves a lot of
responsibility. 

Think about the following scenario. Mario has been tasked with designing the
new website for his company, and he has been given instructions for every
single component, from the colors to the banner design. His job is that of a
designer, but in reality, he doesn’t actually have any freedom to design.
Without freedom, Mario probably feels held back, bored, and disempowered. 

Now let’s think about the opposite situation. Mario has been given total
freedom to develop the website however he wants. At first, the opportunity
probably feels exciting. But then fears and doubts might creep in: If he builds
a website no one likes, he has no one to blame but himself. With the freedom to
create comes total responsibility for what he creates. 

The lesson from this story is that freedom both allows us to feel empowered and
forces us to take responsibility for our thoughts and actions, and to prepare
for the possibility of being wrong or rejected. What freedom gives us is
choice. How we use that opportunity is entirely up to us. 

One of the most important schools of philosophy to discuss the idea of choice
is **existentialism. **The existentialists believed that “existence precedes
essence.” The idea here is that we come into the world as a blank page. To live
is to determine who we are entirely: we can't blame the past, our genetics, or
anything outside of ourselves. As a philosophical position, it’s optimistic in
the sense that we get to choose who we are. But it’s also challenging, because
we are then given the responsibility to shape who and what we are entirely. If
we succeed, that’s on us. But if we fail, that’s also on us.

Whether you’re navigating the freedom and responsibility of actualizing a
milestone at work or making the difficult ethical decision about whether to
fire an employee, remember that with the freedom to choose comes a lot of
responsibility. 

Great leaders don’t treat freedom as power. They treat it as an enormous
responsibility.

## Final summary

The key message in these blinks:

**Many of the problems we face both on a personal level and a business level
could be solved if we explored them through a different lens. Philosophy is a
useful tool in the quest to understand why we act the way we do and how we
could alter our thinking to achieve better results and be better leaders. So,
if you want to be a better leader, or a more rounded person, look to philosophy
for possible answers.**

## Actionable advice: Strengthen your argumentative skills.

The next time you think you are certain about something, run a thought
experiment. Try to locate the basis of your certainty and figure out whether or
not it’s actually a solid foundation. Next, try to build up the logic of the
counter-argument as much as you can. What have you learned by the end that you
didn’t know at the beginning?

## What to read next: Doing Philosophy, by Timothy Williamson

As you’ve just learned, philosophy has a lot to teach us about our assumptions,
what motivates us, and how we can change our thinking to change our lives.
Sure, philosophy can sometimes be pretty abstract and difficult to understand.
But it can also be accessible and applicable to our day-to-day lives. In
**Doing Philosophy**, Timothy Williamson puts the “doing” back into
philosophy. 

Head over to our blinks on **Doing Philosophy **to read up on how William lays
out a bunch of great thought experiments, turns ideas upside down, and invites
you to expand the flexibility and power of your thinking.
