# The Coaching Habit

*By Michael Bungay Stanier*

[My highlights](https://github.com/arafatm/notes/blob/master/mba/the.coaching.habit.by.michael.stanier.md)

[Source: Blinkist](https://www.blinkist.com/en/nc/reader/the-coaching-habit-en)

![The Coaching
Habit](https://images.blinkist.com/images/books/57a5a51ebed677000322c475/3_4/470.jpg)

## What’s in it for me? Become a better coach and empower your team toward greatness.

You’ve most likely worked with a coach before, whether a football coach in high
school, a piano teacher from the neighborhood or a manager at work. If you were
lucky, this person not only taught you the skills you needed to perform a
particular task, but also empowered you to be the best you could be.

Such coaches are unfortunately rare in life. In fact, a majority of employees
say that coaching hasn’t helped them at work at all.

If you’re a manager, how do you make sure that your coaching moments are
effective? First, you need to realize that coaching is not about you – but
about the employee.

These blinks offer a clear guide to mastering the right questions and habits to
becoming a coach who listens well and guides employees to greatness.

In these blinks, you’ll also learn
- how to kickstart a coaching session;
- how asking a “lazy” question will help productivity; and
- why your brain is your biggest enemy in slaying old habits.

## The key message in this book:

A good coach doesn’t just spout advice to a team. 

A good coach instead guides employees toward self-sufficiency in a positive,
caring way. 

Use key coaching questions and truly **listen** to your employees to figure out
what they need and want. 

Empower them daily so they can lead themselves.

## Actionable advice:

**Create a coaching support group.**

Find other people who are looking to develop a coaching habit. Check in with
each other often and share experiences and strategies. You’ll all benefit when
you work together, and your employees will, too!

## The 7 Questions Summarized

- Kickstart question: "What's on your mind?"
- AWE question: "And What Else?"
- Focus question: What’s the real challenge here for you?”
- Foundation question: "What do you want?"
- Lazy question: "How can I help you?"
- Strategic question: "If you're saying 'yes' to this, what are you saying 'no' to?"
- Learning question: "What was most useful for you?"

Don't be afraid of silence

Summarize their thoughts to show you've understood

To form a habit: cause, trigger, mini-habit, training action plan.


## Effective coaching is about empowering a team and improving its long-term performance.

Most managers have attended a coaching seminar or two. Unfortunately, only 23
percent of employees report that coaching sessions have had a positive effect
on work performance.

How can this be the case? How can we make coaching better?

Let’s start by looking at some common problems in the workplace that make it
far too easy for team members and leaders to fall into unproductive work
habits:

Your team refers all decisions, big and small, to you. They lose motivation,
feel no agency, and you become the bottleneck of every project.

You’re overwhelmed at work. You run from meeting to meeting, checking emails on
the go. If an employee has an urgent question, they need to find you first.

Your team is dedicated to completing work tasks, but you’re unsure which tasks
are important and which make little difference.

As a leader, if you find yourself in one of these unproductive work dynamics,
how do you make a change? The key is to develop a **coaching habit**.

Aim to coach your employees for ten minutes every day in an informal setting,
rather than scheduling rigid weekly coaching sessions. Coaching should be a
regular part of life in the office; you should always be in “coaching” mode.

A coaching habit helps you guide your employees toward self-sufficiency. It
prevents you from being buried by work and reconnects you and your team to the
work that matters most.

So **focus on development, not performance**. Performance is important, but you
won’t empower your team if you’re constantly putting out small fires and
forgetting the larger goals. Look for areas in which an employee can grow.
Guide your team to becoming better and more effective at what they do as a
group.

## Use three basic questions to initiate and maintain a constructive conversation with an employee.

A lot of managers “coach” by feigning interest and nodding meaningfully as an
employee talks. Such behavior isn’t productive for either side. To coach
effectively, begin with the **Kickstart question**.

The Kickstart question is an essential tool in your coaching toolbox, and
simply involves asking: **“What’s on your mind?”** Moreover, if you find
yourself in a 20-minute discussion about the weekend with an employee you’re
looking to coach, asking the Kickstart question will get you back on track.

> Kickstart question: "What's on your mind?"

After you’ve listened carefully to what your employee has to say, move to the
**AWE **question: **“And what else?”**

The AWE question prevents a conversation from becoming stuck on a single topic
when it’s clear there’s more the employee wants to say, but perhaps can’t find
a way. Asking the AWE question is handy if you find yourself wanting to make a
comment, too.

> AWE question: "And What Else?"

As a coach, remember that you have to **listen more than speak** or offer
advice. Your goal is to empower your employees, letting them come to their own
conclusions. The worst thing for a leader is a group of employees who run to
them every time a decision needs to be made.

In cases where the first two questions in your coaching talk aren’t leading to
a productive conversation, consider using the **Focus** question: **“What’s the
real challenge here for you?”**

When an employee starts to lose his train of thought or if you’re having a hard
time following, that’s a good time to pop the Focus question.

While an employee might want to vent about problems with a certain project, for
instance, it won’t solve anything. The Focus question helps you narrow down the
problem so you can tackle it together. In short, it helps you determine which
challenge you need to work on first.

> Focus question: What’s the real challenge here for you?”

The three coaching questions – **Kickstart, AWE and Focus** – are the
foundation of your coaching practice.

Let’s look at a further four questions which will launch you from basic coach
to professional coach.

## Identifying an employee’s needs and wants will help you become a more effective manager.

It’s not always easy to identify what you need to do at work every day.
Similarly, how can you coach an employee if she doesn’t even know why she’s
speaking with you?

An effective coach knows how to determine an employee’s needs in any given
situation. People are always driven by wants or needs and asking the
**Foundation** question can help when a conversation starts going in circles.

Use the Foundation question **“What do you want?”** to get to the heart of the
matter.

Scientists say that people are driven by nine major wants and needs: affection,
creation, recreation, freedom, identity, understanding, participation,
protection and subsistence. The Foundation question helps you figure out which
of these wants or needs is motivating your employee.

Does your employee want you to **understand** that they need to get home early?
Do they want to **participate** in a project more? Do they need more
**freedom** to explore an idea?

> Foundation question: "What do you want?"

Another important tool in ascertaining the needs and wants of an employee is
the **Lazy** question. Ask the question **“How can I help you?”** when an
employee has nothing to offer but complaints about a situation.

The Lazy question sets up a positive coaching moment. Asking this question
helps you check if an employee is asking you for something or just wants to let
off steam. It also clarifies the issue by pushing your employee to get to the
point. While it’s a direct question, it also will help you earn your employee’s
respect.

When you ask the Lazy question, you show your employee that you want to know
what **they **want. Understanding an employee’s wants will set you apart from
many other managers who just don’t care.

> Lazy question: "How can I help you?"

## Balance your schedule and make space for learning by posing the Strategic and Learning questions.

Do you often jump at an opportunity without assessing the situation thoroughly?
Here’s a couple of tips and key questions to help you better gauge the risks
and benefits of any opportunity.

In short, it’s unwise to say “yes” to every single opportunity that comes your
way. To ensure you give yourself time to think clearly, ask yourself the
**Strategic** question: **“If you’re saying ‘yes’ to this, what are you saying
‘no’ to?”**

When you take on something new, you drop something else. Yet you shouldn’t
waste resources or neglect important projects. Use the Strategic question when
you need to focus your energy on the projects that matter to you and the
company.

Focus your decisions by identifying the projects, people or habits you’ll have
to change or abandon if you take on a new task. Consider that some tasks
require you to hire new personnel or develop completely new organizational or
working methods.

Whenever you say “yes” or “no” to a project, make sure you understand the
reason **why**. Here’s a tip: never respond to a request right away. Get as
much information as you can before you make a commitment.

Ask yourself: What will this new opportunity demand of you? What’s the
deadline? How much time will it take? What’s the reason for it? What else needs
to be accomplished before it can be finished?

> Strategic question: "If you're saying 'yes' to this, what are you saying 'no' to?"

In addition to strategizing effectively, another important part of coaching is
making room for employees to learn.

This isn’t an easy task, as people don’t automatically internalize new
information or quickly build new habits. In general, people learn when they’re
able to **reflect** on new information or processes. Reflection is what makes a
lesson “click.”

To guide your employees toward that “click” moment, use the **Learning
**question. At the end of every coaching session, ask your employee: “**What
was most useful for you?”**

Asking the Learning question helps to guide your employee to reflect on the
session so he can keep building his skills and learning daily.

> Learning question: "What was most useful for you?"

## A good coach doesn’t just know what to ask, they know how to ask it.

This happens to every coach. You try to hold your tongue, but then, you
accidentally blurt out a bit of advice. That’s not coaching!

It’s parenting, or worse: it’s preaching. You now know that coaching is about
questions, so how do you **make sure your coaching practice stays about
questions**?

A good coach knows **how** to ask questions. But spouting a series of questions
can easily make an employee feel as if he’s being interviewed or even
interrogated. As a coach, you don’t want to make your employees feel
uncomfortable.

So put an employee at ease by asking one question at a time. Don’t beat around
the bush, however. Skip the small talk and cut to your first question; it saves
both of you time.

**Ask “what” questions instead of “why” questions**. Don’t make the employee
feel like she needs to be on the defensive with a question like, “Why is that
on your mind?” Ask instead, “What’s on your mind?”

It’s also important to **avoid asking rhetorical questions**. Questions that
start with, “Did you consider…?” or “Have you thought about…?” aren’t genuine
questions – **they’re advice with a question mark at the end!**

Make sure you **listen** to your employees, too. **Don’t be afraid of
silence**.  Silence tends to make people uncomfortable, but it’s an asset in
coaching sessions. When you’re silent after you ask a question, you give your
employee time to think about what she wants to say.

> Don't be afraid of silence

And when an employee gives you an answer, **nod or summarize her thoughts to show
that you’ve understood**. Doing so shows that you care and encourages the
employee to share more.

> Summarize their thoughts to show you've understood

Finally, use every available channel to be a positive and effective coach.
Perhaps your team members stay in touch via email or messaging software such as
Slack. Remember that you’re still wearing your coaching hat when you
communicate through these tools. Every interaction you have with employees is a
coaching opportunity.

## Develop a long-term coaching habit so you can remain an expert coach for the rest of your life.

Learning **what** to do and **doing it** are two different things. Let’s go
over some ways you can stick to the tips you’ve learned by making them a habit
in your coaching practice.

It’s not easy to change behavior. In fact, according to a Duke University
study, 45 percent of a person’s behavior stems from habit alone. And it’s
difficult to change a habit if you don’t even think about it any more!

To develop new habits, then, you need to put **theory** into **practice**.

In recent years, neuroscientists and behavioral economists have gained insight
into how humans develop and maintain habits. There are five events that need to
occur for a habit to form: **cause, trigger, mini-habit, training** and an
**action plan**.

> To form a habit: cause, trigger, mini-habit, training action plan.

Let’s go through each event. A **cause** is the reason you want to change
current behavior, like wanting to avoid giving advice, as it’s a hallmark of
poor coaching. Once you know what you want to change, you identify your
**trigger** – the moments that encourage you to offer advice. When you know
your trigger, you’ll be prepared to deal with it.

Your **mini-habits** are the seven coaching questions you’ve learned in these
blinks. Practice them as often as possible. That’s your **training**!

Finally, outline an** action plan** to fall back on when you slip up. Everyone
makes mistakes, so you just need to figure out how to get back on track.

Importantly, write down your action plan. Your plan could read, “The next time
John stops me in the hallway with a question, I’ll ask a coaching question
instead of giving advice.”

Once you put theory into practice, you’ll develop a solid coaching habit that
will stick with you for the rest of your life. Good luck – and happy coaching!

## Suggested further reading: The Leadership Challenge by James Kouzes and Barry Posner

In The Leadership Challenge, James Kouzes and Barry Posner explain how anyone
can become a better leader. Citing various examples from their 25 years of
experience and extensive research, the authors present their theories on what
makes a successful leader, and give practical advice on how to learn good
leadership behavior.


